                                                                                                                 ;
       Ch. I.          II. CHRONICLES, OR PARALIPOMENOK
       I.        WHEN the authority of Solomon son of David was firmly
             established over his kingdom, and the Lord his God, being with
         2 him, had magnified him exceedingly, Solomon spoke to all Is-
             rael, to the captains of thousands, and the captains of hundreds
             and to the judges and to all the chiefs before Israel, namely the
         3 heads of the patriarchal families ; and he and all the congrega-
             tion went to the high place at Gabaon, at which place was the
             tabernacle of the testimony of God, which Moses the servant
         4 of the Lord had made in the wilderness.                                     (But David had
             brought the ark of God from the city Kariathiarim, for he had
             provided for it—for he had erected for it a tabernacle at Jeru-
         5 salem.)          The brasen altar also, which Beseleel son of                                  arias
             son of Or had made, was there before the tabernacle of the
             Lord.       To this therefore Solomon and the congregation repair-
         6 ed.       And he made an offering there on the brasen altar before
             the Lord, on that at the tabernacle.                        And when he had offered
         7 upon it a thousand victims God appeared to Solomon that night
         8 and said to him, Ask what I shall give thee.                                 Thereupon Solo-
             mon said to God, Thou hast shewn great kindness to my fa-
             ther David, and hast made me king in his stead, now therefore,
         9       Lord my God, let thy name I beseech thee be established on
             my father David.               Seeing thou hast made me king over a peo-
       10 pie numerous as the dust of the earth, grant me now wisdom
             and understanding that I may go out and come in before this
             people : for who can judge this thy people which is so great ?
       11 And God said to Solomon, Because this hath been in thy heart
             and thou hast not asked wealth nor glory nor the life of thy
             enemies ; nor even asked long life ; but hast asked for thyself
             wisdom and understanding that thou mayst judge my people
        12 over whom I have made thee king : Wisdom and understand-
             ing I now give thee : And I will give thee riches and wealth
             and glory, such as none of the kings who were before thee have
             had; nor shall any after thee have the like.
        13         Then Solomon came to Jerusalem, from the high place at
             Gabaon, which is before the tabernacle of the testimony ; and
        14 reigned over Israel.                    And Solomon collected chariots, and
             horsemen, and he had fourteen hundred chariots, and twelve
             thousand horsemen.                 Those he left in the chariot cities; but
        15 the people were with the king in Jerusalem.                                     And the king
                   VOL. II.                                    A
                                                                                                                                                               :;;
                Ch. II.                                            II. CHRONICLES.
                        made silver and gold as plenteous at Jerusalem as stones
                       and cedars in Judea, like the sykamine trees in the plain for
                16 abundance.                       Now Solomon's horses came up out of Egypt
                       and this was the price allowed to the king's merchants for
                17 going.                 They purchased, and came up, and brought out of
                       Egypt a chariot for six hundred shekels of silver, and a horse
                       for a hundred and fifty.                                  And at that rate they were brought
                       for all the kings of the Chettites, and by their means for the
                       kings of Syria.
                II.            Solomon having determined to build a house for the name
                  2 of the Lord, and a house for his kingdom, collected seventy
                       thousand men to carry burthens, and eighty thousand hewers
                       of stone on the mountains ; and the overseers over them, were
                  3 three thousand six hundred.                                            And Solomon sent to Chiram,
                       king of Tyre, saying, As thou hast dealt with my father Da-
                  4 vid and sent him cedar to build himself a house to dwell in
                       behold I his son am going to build a house for the name of
                       the Lord my God, to be dedicated to him, that I may burn
                       incense before him, and set bread continually in his presence,
                       and that I may offer whole burnt offerings continually, morn-
                       ing and evening, and on the sabbaths, and at the new moons
                       and festivals of the Lord our God ; this being an ordinance
                  5 forever to Israel.                        And as the house which I am going to build
                       is    great ; for great is the Lord our God above all gods, and
                  o'   who is able to build a house for him ?                                               For the heaven and the
                       heaven of heavens, cannot contain his glory ; who then am I,
                       that I should build a house for him, save only to burn incense
                  7 before him?                       Now therefore send me a man wise and skilled
                       in working up gold and silver, and brass and iron, and pur-
                       ple and scarlet and blue, and who can engrave skilfully with
                       the skilful men who are with me in Jerusalem, those materials
                  S which my father hath provided.                                              Send me also cedar and cy-
                       press and pine timber, from Libanus.                                                 As I know how expert
                       thy servants are in cutting timber from Libanus, let thy ser-
                  9 vants therefore go with my servants, to provide me timber in
                       plenty : for the house which I am going to build, is to be great
                10 and glorious.                       Now behold, I have assigned provisions for the
                       workmen who cut the timber, food for thy servants, twenty
                       thousand cores of wheat, and twenty thousand cores of bar-
    Ch. Ill                 II. CHRONICLES.
        ley, and twenty thousand measures of wine, and twenty thou-
    11 sand measures of oil.     To this Chiram king of Tyre replied
        in writing, and sent to Solomon, saying, Because the Lord
     12 loved his people, he hath made thee king over them.        More-
        over Chiram said, Blessed be the Lord the God of Israel, who
        made the heaven and the earth, who hath given king David,
        a wise son endued with knowledge and understanding, to
    13 build a house for the Lord and a house for his kingdom.      Now
        therefore I have sent thee a man of wisdom and understand-
     14 ing, named after my father Chiram.       His mother was one of
        the daughters of Dan, but his father was a Tyrian.   He is skill-
        ed in working up gold and silver, and brass and iron, and
        stones and wood ; and in weaving purple and blue yarn, and
        cotton, and with scarlet ; and engraving and executing every
        device to which thou shalt put him with thy artists, and the
     15 artists of my lord David, thy father.   And with regard to the
     10 wheat and the barley and the oil and the wine, which my lord
        hath mentioned, let him send them to his servants, and we
        will cut timber from Libanus, as much as thou shalt want, and
        send it in floats by water to Joppa, that thou mayst convey it
        to Jerusalem.
     17     When Solomon assembled all the strangers who were in
        the land of Israel, after the numbering which his father Da-
        vid had made of them, they were found to amount to a hun-
     18 clred and fifty three thousand six hundred.   So of these he ap-
        pointed seventy thousand to carry burdens, and eighty thou-
        sand to hew stones, and three thousand six hundred to be
        overseers, to keep the people to work.
     III.    At length Solomon began building the house of the Lord
        at Jerusalem, on mount Arnoria, where the Lord appeared
        to his father David ; in the place which David had prepared
      2 at the threshing floor of Orna, the Jebusite.   He began build-
      3 ing in the second month, in the fourth year of his reign.    And
        these were the mensurations, with which Solomon began to
        build the house of God.    The first measurement was in length
      4 sixty cubits, and in breadth twenty cubits, including an ailam
        in front of the house of the same breadth, as that of the house,
        twenty cubits, and the height of which was a hundred and
        twenty cubits.   And he overlaid the house on the inside, with
       Ch. IV.                 II. CHRONICLES.
         5 pure gold.  When he had wainscotted this great house with
           planks of cedar, he overlaid them with pure gold, and en-
           graved upon it, palm trees and chains, and he adorned the
         6 house with precious stones for glory, and gilded it with the
        7 choicest gold from Pharuim ; and having gilded the house,
           both the walls and the gates, and the vaulted ceilings, and the
        8 doors, with gold, he engraved cherubims on the walls.      And
           he made the house of the Holy of Holies.    Its breadth was in
           front, the same as that of the house, twenty cubits and its
           length twenty cubits ; and he overlaid it for cherubims, with
        9 pure gold, to the amount of six hundred talents ; and with
           regard to the weight of the nails, each nail weighed fifty she-
       10 kels of gold.  The upper chamber he overlaid with gold.    And
           in this house, namely in the Holy of Holies, he made two che-
           rubims, a workmanship of wood, and overlaid them with gold.
       11 The extent of the wings of the cherubims was twenty cubits,
           one wing of five cubits touching the wall of the house, and
           the other wing of five cubits, touching the wing of the other
       13 cherubim reciprocally ;  so that the wings of the cherubims,
           were expanded twenty cubits, and they stood upon their feet
       14 and their faces were towards the house.    And he made the veil
           of blue and purple and scarlet and cotton yarn, and wove che-
       15 rubims therein.   And he made before the house two pillars thir-
       16 ty five cubits high, including the chapiters of five cubits.And
           he made net works and put them on the chapiters of the pillars,
          and he made a hundred pomegranates, and fixed them to the
       17 net works.   And he reared up the pillars in front of the tem-
           ple, one on the right, and one on the left, and he called the
           name of that on the right 'Rectitude, and the name of that on
           the left, Strength.
       IV.     And he made an altar of brass, the length of it was twenty
           cubits and the breadth twenty cubits and the height ten cubits.
        2 And he made the molten sea, ten cubits the diameter, with a
           border round about, and five cubits the height and thirty cu-
        3 bits the circumference.  And under the border was the simili-
           tude of oxen which encompass it round about.     Ten to a cubit
           encompass the laver all around.   It stood upon twelve beeves.
        4 In casting the beeves they were made of two kinds.        Three
           faced the north and three faced the west and three faced the
     Ch. IV.                  II. CHRONICLES.
      5 south and three faced the east.   Upon these the sea stood.    And
        their hinder parts were inwards.     And the thickness of the sea
        was a hand breadth, and its brim like the brim of a cup was en-
        graved with flowers of a lilly.   And it contained three thousand
      6 measures.   And when he had finished it he made ten lavers and
        set five on the right and five on the left for washing in them the
        things pertaining to the whole burnt offerings, and for rinsing
      7 in them.   But the sea was for the priests to wash in.    He made
        also the ten candlesticks of gold according to the pattern there-
        of and put them in the temple, five on the right and five on the
      8 left.  And he made ten tables and set them in the temple, five
      9 on the right and five on the left.  And he made a hundred gold-
        en cups.   He made also the court of the priests, and the great
        court, and the gates for the court.   And their doors were over-
     10 laid with brass.    And he placed the sea at the corner of the
     11 house on the right so as to be over against the east.         Then
        Chiram made the flesh forks, and the censers, and the grate of
     12 the altar, and all the utensils thereof.   And when Chiram had
        finished all the work which he made for king Solomon for the
        house of God—the two pillars and the ornaments on the chapi-
        ters of the pillars, and the two pieces of net work to cover the
        ornaments which were on the chapiters of the pillars, and four
        hundred little bells for the two pieces of net work, and the two
        kinds of pomegranates for each piece of net work which was
     14 to cover the ornaments upon the pillars, and had made the ten
        mechonoths, and the lavers for the mechonoths, and the sea with
     15 the twelve beeves under it, and the cauldrons with their pot
        hooks, and the kettles, and the flesh forks, and all the untensils
     16 belonging to them—when Chiram had made them he brought
     17 them to king Solomon to the house of the Lord.           They were
        all of pure brass.  The king had them cast on the border of the
         Jordan, in the clay ground at the house of Sokchoth, and be-
     18 tween that and Saredetha.      And Solomon caused all the uten-
         sils to be made in great abundance, for there was no deficiency
     19 in the quantity of brass.    But all the utensils for the house of
         the Lord, namely the golden altar and the tables upon which
     20 the presence loaves were to be laid, and the candlesticks and the
         lamps to give light according to the rule prescribed, namely
         those in front of the dabir, all these Solomon made of pure
                                                                        —
            V.
        Ch.                    II. CHBONIOLES.
       21 gold, with the snuffers and. lamp dishes.  The cups also and the
        22 censers and the fire pans were all of pure gold.   And with re-
           gard to the inner doors of the house into the Holy of Holies
           these doors of the house of the temple he covered with gold.
       V.     And when all the work was finished which Solomon made
           for the house of the Lord, he brought in the dedications of his
           father David, the silver and the gold and the vessels, and depo-
         2 sited them in the treasury of the house of the Lord.  Then So-
           lomon assembled at Jerusalem all the elders of Israel and all
           the chiefs of the tribes, the leaders of the families of the sons
           of Israel to bring up the ark of the covenant of the Lord out
         3 of the city of David, which is Sion.  And when all Israel were
           assembled before the king at the festival which is in the seventh
        4 month, all the elders of Israel went, and all the Levites took
         5 up the ark and the tabernacle of the testimony and all the holy
           utensils which were in the tabernacle, and the priests and the
        5 Levites carried it up. And while king Solomon and all the con-
           gregation of Israel, both the devout, and they who were assem-
           bled with them before the ark, were sacrificing beeves      and
           sheep which could not be numbered nor reckoned by reason of
         7 their multitude, the priests carried the ark of the covenant of
           the Lord into its place—into the dabir of the house—into the
        8 Holy of Holies under the wings of the cherubims : for the che-
           rubims had their wings expanded over the place of the ark, and
        9 made a covering above, over the ark and over its staves.    Now
           the staves projected, and their heads were seen from the Holies
           towards the front of the dabir, but were not seen from without,
       10 and there they have continued to this day.    Now there was no-
           thing in the ark, but the two tables which Moses put therein
           at Choreb, containing the covenant which the Lord made with
           the Israelites, when they came out of the land of Egypt.
       11     And when the priests were come out of the Holies, (for all
           the priests then present were hallowed and were not distributed
       12 into courses,) and the Levites, who were singers—all the sons
           of Asaph, Aiman and Idithun, with their sons and brethren,
           arrayed in robes of cotton, had taken their stations with cym-
           bals, and with nablas, and with kinyras, over against the altar,
           and with them a hundred and twenty priests, sounding trump-
        13 ets, so as to join in harmonious concert both with those who
     Ch. VI.                        II. CHRONICLES.
          led the sung ami those who made responses to thank and praise
          the Lord ; soon as they raised their voice, with trumpets and
          cymbals and instruments of nmsick, and said,
                    O praise the Lord, for it is good,
                    For to everlasting his mercy endureth ;
     14 immediately the house was filled with the cloud of the glory
          of the Lord, so that the priests could not stand to minister by
          reason of the cloud, for the glory of the Lord rilled the house of
          God.     Then Solomon said, The Lord said he would dwell in
      VI.       thick darkness.       Now I have built a house for thy name,
          dedicated to thee, and furnished for thy everlasting habitation.
       3 ' Then the king turned his face and blessed all the congregation
       4 of Israel, and all the congregation of Israel stood.                         Then
          the king said, Blessed be the Lord the God of Israel ! With his
          hand he hath compleated what with his mouth he spoke to my
       5 father David, saying, From the day I brought my people out
          of the land of Egypt, I did not make choice of any city among
          all the tribes of Israel for a house to be built, that my name
          might be there ; nor did I chuse a man to be ruler over my
       (J people Israel.      But now I have chosen Jerusalem that my name
       7 may be there, and I have made choice of David to be over my
          people Israel.      Yet when it came into my father David's heart
       8 to build a house to the name of the Lord God of Israel, the
          Lord said to my father David, Forasmuch as it came into thy
          heart to build a house for my name, thou hast done well that
       (j it was in thy heart.        But thou shalt not build the house.               For
          thy son who shall spring from thy loins, even he shall build the
      10 house for my name.            Now the Lord hath performed this word
          which he spoke. I have been raised up in the room of my father
          David, and am seated on the throne of Israel, as the Lord
      11 hath spoken ; and I have built the house for the name of the
          Lord God of Israel, and placed therein the ark, in which is the
          covenant of the Lord which he made with Israel.
      12       Then he took his station on one side over against the altar
           and facing all the congregation of Israel, and spread forth his
           hands—For Solomon had made a brasen scaffold and placed
           it in the midst of the court of the sanctuary.               The length of it
           was five cubits and its breadth five cubits, and its height three
           cubits.    So he took his station on that, and kneeling down on
       Ch. VI.                 II. CHRONICLES.
           bis knees before all tbe congregation of Israel, be    stretched
           forth his hands to heaven and said,
       14        Lord, the God of Israel, there is no God like thee in
           heaven or on earth, keeping covenant and shewing mercy to
       15 thy servants, who walk before thee with a perfect heart.   Thou
          hast kept with thy servant David, my father, that which thon
           didst speak to him.   What with thy mouth thou didst speak,
           thou with thy hand hast performed as at this day.   Now there-
           fore,   Lord God of Israel, keep with thy servant David my
           father that which thou hast spoken to him, saying, There shall
           not fail thee from before me a man sitting on the throne of Is-
           rael, provided thy sons take heed to their way to walk in my
       17 law as thou hast walked before me.      Now, therefore,     Lord
           God of Israel, let thy word, I beseech thee, which thou hast
           spoken to thy servant David, be confirmed, that it shall be so.
       18     Will God indeed dwell with man on the earth !     If the hea-
           ven, and the heaven of heaven, will not contain thee, what then
       19 is this house which I have built ?  Yet thou wilt look upon the
          prayer of thy servant, even this supplication of mine that thou,
             Lord God, mayst hearken to the supplication and the prayer
       20 which thy servant maketh before thee this day, that thine eyes
          may be open on this house day and night—on this place where
          thou hast ordered thy name to be invoked, that thou mayst
           hearken to the prayer which thy servant prayeth towards this
          place.
       21     Thou indeed wilt hearken to the prayer of thy servant and
           of thy people Israel. Whatever they pray towards this place,
           thou indeed wilt listen in the place of thy habitation from hea-
           ven, and wilt hear and be merciful.
       22     If any man sin against his neighbour, and take upon him a
       23 curse to be cursed, and come and swear before this altar in this
          house, thou indeed wilt hearken from heaven, and act and
          judge thy servants by retributing to the wicked and requiting
           his ways upon his head, by justifying the righteous, and recom-
           pensing him according to his righteousness.
       24     And if thy people Israel be discomfited before the enemy,
           though they have sinned against thee, yet when they return and
           confess to thy name, and pray and make supplication before
       25 thee in this house; thou indeed wilt hear from heaven and
    Ch. VI.                 II. CHRONICLES.
        pardon the sins of thy people Israel, and bring them back to
        the land which thou hast given to them and their fathers.
    26     And when the heaven is shut up, and there is no rain be-
        cause they have sinned against thee ; yet when they pray to-
        wards this place and praise thy name, and turn from their sins
    27 because thou hast humbled them ; thou indeed wilt hear from
        heaven and pardon the sins of thy servants and of thy people
        Israel ; for thou wilt shew them the good way in which they are
        to walk, and wilt send rain on this thy land which thou hast
        given to thy people for an inheritance.
    28     If there be famine in the land, if there be pestilence, blasting
        or mildew ; or if there be locusts of any kind ; or if their enemy
    29 before their gates afflict them ; whatever the stroke, whatever
        the affliction may be, and in consequence thereof, whatever
        may be the prayer and whatever the supplication which may
        be made by any man, or by all thy people Israel ; when a man
        shall know his own sore, or his own affliction, and shall spread
    30 forth his hands towards this house ; thou indeed wilt hear from
        heaven, from thy settled abode, and be merciful, and wilt ren-
        der to every one according to his ways, as thou knowest his
    31 heart ; (for thou alone knowest the hearts of the children of
        men) that they may revere all thy ways, all the days which
        they may live in the land which thou hast given our fathers.
    32     And with regard to every stranger who is not of thy people
        Israel, but who may have come from a distant land, on account
        of thy great name, and thy mighty hand, and thy out stretched
    33 arm, when they come and pray towards this place; thou in-
        deed wilt hear from heaven—from thy settled abode, and wilt
        do according to all for which the stranger calleth on thee, that
        all the tribes of the earth may know thy name, and that they,
        like thy people Israel, may fear thee, and know that this house
        which I have built is called by thy name.
    34     And when thy people shall go forth to war against their
        enemies in the way which thou shalt send them, and shall pray
        to thee towards this city which thou hast chosen, and towards
    35 this house which I have built to thy name ; thou indeed wilt
        hear from heaven their prayer and their supplication, and
        maintain their cause.
    36     When they shall sin against thee (for there is no man who
        may not sin) and thou shalt smite them, and deliver them up
           VOL. II.                   B
         Oh. VII.                        II. CHRONICLES.
              before the face of their enemies, and they who captivate them
              shall carry them away captives to an enemy's country, far off
         37 or near home; when they change their heart in the land to
              which they have been removed, and return and supplicate thee
         38 in the land of their captivity, saying, We have sinned, we
              have transgressed, we have done wickedly ; and turn to thee
              with their whole heart, and their whole soul, in the land of
              those who have captivated them, whithersoever they may have
              carried them captives ; when they shall pray towards their
              land which thou gavest to their fathers, and towards this city
              which thou hast chosen, and this house which I have built for
         39 thy name : thou, from heaven, from thy settled abode, wilt
              hear their prayer and their supplication, and maintain their
              cause, and be reconciled to thy people who have sinned against
              thee.
         40       And now,           Lord, let thine eyes, I beseech thee, be open
              and thine ears attentive to the prayer made in this place.                    And,
              now, arise,       Lord God, into thy rest, thou and the ark of thy
              strength.     Let thy priests,          Lord God, be clothed with salva-
              tion, and thy children made glad with good things.                       Turn not
              away,      Lord God, the face of thine anointed.                 Remember the
              mercies of David thy servant.
         VII.        And soon as Solomon finished his prayer the fire from
              heaven descended and consumed the whole burnt offerings
              with their sacrifices.         Now the glory of the Lord filled the
              house so that the priests could not enter the house of the Lord
             at that time, because the glory of the Lord filled the house.
          3 And when all the Israelites saw the fire descending and the
              glory of the Lord on the house, they fell with their face to the
              ground on the pavement.                And when they had worshipped,
              they sung to the Lord the hymn of praise, For it is </ood : for
              It ismercy endureth forever, while the king and all the people
           5 were offering incense before the Lord.                    Then king Solomon
             offered as a thank offering twenty two thousand beeves and a
             hundred and twenty thousand sheep.
           6      Now when the king and all the people dedicated the house,
              while the priests were standing in their watches ; and the Le-
              vites, with the musical instruments of the Lord, made by king
              David to praise the Lord, for his mercy endureth forever, were
          VII.                II. CHRONICLES.
      Ch.
         performing with thern in tlie hymns of David ; and the priests
         were sounding the trumpets before them ; and all the people
         were standing ; Solomon consecrated the middle of the court
         which belonged to the house of the Lord, that he might offer
         there the whole burnt offerings with the suet of the thank of-
         ferings, because the brasen altar which Solomon had made
         was not capable of receiving the whole burnt offerings with
         the sacrifices of the suet.
      8     So Solomon kept the festival at that time seven days, he
         and all Israel with him, an exceeding great congregation from
      9 the bay of Aimath to the torrent of Egypt.     And on the eighth
         day he made a finishing feast, for he had celebrated the dedica-
     10 tion of the altar with a festival of seven days.      And on the
         three and twentieth day of the seventh month he sent away
         the people to their abodes, glad, and with cheerful hearts for
         all the goodness which the Lord had shewn to David, and to
         Solomon, and to his people Israel.
     11     Solomon having thus finished the house of the Lord, and
         the house of the king, and having been prospered in doing all
         that came into his heart for the house of the Lord, and his own
         house, the Lord appeared that night to Solomon and said to
     12 him, I have heard thy prayer and made choice of this place
     13 for myself to be a house of sacrifice.   If I shut up heaven and
         there be no rain; or if I command the locust to devour the
     14 trees ; or send a pestilence among my people ; when my peo-
         ple who are called by my name humble themselves, and pray
         to me and seek my favour, and turn from their evil ways, I
         will hear from heaven and forgive their sins, and heal their
     15 land.   And now mine eyes shall be open and my ears attentive
     16 to the prayer made in this place.    For I have now chosen and
        hallowed this house, that my name may be there forever ; and
     17 mine eyes and my heart shall be there continually.    And if thou
        wilt walk before me as thy father David did, and do according
         to all that I have commanded thee, and keep my statutes and
     18 my judgments, I will establish the throne of thy kingdom as I
         covenanted with thy father David, saying, The ruler over Is-
     19 rael shall not be taken from thee.     But if you turn aside and
         forsake my statutes and my commandments which I have set
        before you ; and go and serve strange gods and worship them,
       Ch. VIII.               II. CHRONICLES.
          I will assuredly remove you from this laud which I have given
       20 them.   And I will remove out of my sight this house which I
          have hallowed to my name, and make it a proverb and a bye
       21 word among all the nations.  Yes, at this house which is so lofty,
          every one who passeth by it shall be astonished, and say, Why
       22 hath the Lord dealt thus with this land and this house?      To
          which it will be answered, Because they forsook the Lord, the
          God of their fathers, who brought them out of the land of
          Egypt, and took other gods in his stead, and worshipped them
          and served them, therefore he brought upon them all this
          calamity.
       VIII.     Now after the twenty years in which Solomon built the
        2 house of the Lord, and his own house, he rebuilt those cities
          which Chiram returned to him, and caused the Israelites to
        3 dwell there.   Then he went to Baisoba and strengthened it.
        4 And he built Thoedmor in the wilderness, and all those forti-
        5 fled cities which he built in Emath.  He rebuilt also the upper
          and the lower Baithoron, cities fortified with walls, gates and
        6 bars ; and Balath and all the strong cities which belonged to
          Solomon ; and all the chariot cities, and the cities for the caval-
          ry, and whatever he had an inclination to build at Jerusalem,
        7 or on Libanus, or in all his kingdom.   With regard to all the
          people who were left of the Chettites and the Amorites and
          the Pheresites and the Evites and the Jebusites who were not
        8 Israelites, but descendants of the children of them who were
          left in the land, whom the children of Israel had not rooted out,
       9 these Solomon laid under tribute as at this day.      But of the
          children of Israel he made no servants for his kingdom.     For
          behold they were warriors, and chiefs, and officers, and the
      10 captains of chariots and horsemen.     And there were two hun-
          dred and fifty of them who superintended king Solomon's
      11 overseers who kept the people to work.       Moreover king So-
          lomon brought Pharao's daughter from the city of David,
          to the house which he had built for her ; for he said, My wife
          shall not dwell in the city of David king of Israel ; for the place
          to which the ark of the Lord hath come is holy.
      12     Then Solomon offered whole burnt offerings to the Lord
          on the altar which he had built to the Lord over against the
      13 temple according to the daily rate for every day, which were
                               II. CHRONICLES.
      Ch. IX.
          to be offered according to the commands of Moses, on the
          sabbaths and at the new moons, and at the festivals which were
          three in the year—the festival of unleavened bread, the festival
      14 of weeks, and the festival of tabernacles.    And according to the
          regulation of his father David, he appointed the courses of the
          priests according to their services ; and the Levites were set
          to their charges to sing praises and to minister before the
          priests, as the duty of every day required ; and the keepers of
      15 the gates were distributed into their classes for every gate.   For
          so David, the man of God had commanded.          They transgress-
          ed not the commands of the king, respecting the priests or the
         Levites who were appointed to every charge, or over the trea-
      16 sures.   Now all this business had been prepared from the day
          Solomon laid the foundation, but it was deferred until he had
         finished the house of the Lord.
      17     Then Solomon went to Gesion-gaber and to Ailath, which
         is  on the sea shore in the land of Idumea ; and Chiram sent
         him by the hand of his servants, ships and seamen, and they
         went with Solomon's servants to Sopphira, and brought thence
         four hundred and fifty talents of gold, and came to Solomon.
      IX.     AVhen the queen of Saba heard of the fame of Solomon,
         she came to Jerusalem with a great retinue, to try him with
         hard questions, and brought with her camels carrying spices
         in abundance, and gold and precious stones.         And when she
         came to Solomon and propounded to him all the questions
         which were in her mind, Solomon solved all her questions.
       2 Not a question escaped Solomon, which he did not solve for
       3 her.   And when the queen of Saba saw the wisdom of Solo-
       4 mon, and the house which he had built, and the provisions of
         his table, and the sitting of his servants, and the order of his
         attendants and their apparel, and his butlers and their dress, and
         the whole burnt offerings which he offered in the house of the
       5 Lord, she was astonished, and said to the king, It was a true
         report which I heard in my own country concerning thine acts
         and concerning thy wisdom ; but I did not believe the reports
         until I came and saw with my own eyes.          Now behold 1 was
       7 not told one half of the greatness of thy wisdom.        Thou hast
         surpassed the report which I heard.      Happy are these men of
         thine ! happy these thy servants who wait upon thee continu-
         ally and hear thy wisdom ! blessed be the Lord thy God who
      Ch. IX.                 II. CHRONICLES.
          delighted in thee to set thee on his throne, to be a king for the
          Lord thy God.    Because the Lord thy God loved Israel, there-
          fore, that he might establish thern forever, he made thee king
        9 over them to execute judgment and justice.       Then she gave
          the king a hundred and twenty talents of gold, and spices in
          great abundance, and precious stones.      There were no such
          spices as those which the queen of Saba gave to king So-
      10 lomon.    The servants of Solomon also, and the servants of
          Chiram, brought gold to Solomon from Souphir, and algum
      11 timber and precious stones.    And of the algum timber the king-
          made stairs for the house of the Lord, and for the king's
          house ; and kitharas and nablas for the singers ; for such had
      12 never been seen before in the land of Juda.      And when king
          Solomon had given the queen of Saba all her desire—what-
          ever she asked, exclusive of the return which he made for all
      13 that she had brought to the king, she returned to her own
          country.
             Now the quantity of gold which was brought to Solomon
          in one year, was six hundred and sixty six talents of gold, be-
          sides what was brought by subjects and merchants, by all the
          kings of Arabia and the lords of the country, who all brought
       15 gold and silver to king Solomon.      And king Solomon made
          two hundred bucklers of beaten gold; six hundred shekels of
          pure gold were on each buckler ; and three hundred shields of
          beaten gold ; each shield being plated with three hundred she-
          kels of gold.  And the king deposited these in the house of the
       17 forest of Libanus.  The king made also a great throne of ivory
          and overlaid it with pure gold.   There were six steps up to the
          throne, which was overlaid with gold ; and arms on each side of
          the seat of the throne ; and two lions standing at the two arms, and
          twelve lions standing on the six steps, on the one side and the
       20 other.  There was not the like in any kingdom. Moreover all the
          utensils of king Solomon were of gold.    And all the utensils of
          the house of the forest of Libanus were plated with gold.     Sil-
          ver was not of estimation in the days of Solomon for any pur-
       21 pose.  For a fleet went for the king to Tharsis with the ser-
          vants of Chiram.    And once every three years, ships came from
          Tharsis for the king, laden with gold and silver and elephants'
       22 teeth and apes.    So that Solomon was magnified above all the
            X.                      II. CHRONICLES.
      Ck.
      23 kings both in riches and wisdom.                 And all the kings of the
           land sought an interview with Solomon, to hear his wisdom
      24 which God had put in his heart.               And they brought, every one
           his gifts, vessels of silver and vessels of gold, with raiment,
      25 stacte, perfumes, horses and mules ; and this every year.                    And
           Solomon had four thousand breeding mares for his chariots,
           and twelve thousand horsemen; and these he placed in the
      26 chariot cities, and with the king at Jerusalem.                    And he was
           ruler over all the kings, from the river to the land of the Phi-
      27 listines, and to the borders of Egypt.                 And the king made
           gold and silver in Jerusalem, plenteous as stones, and cedars
      28 as the sycamine trees in the plain for multitude.                    And Solo-
           mon had horses brought for him out of Egypt and from every
      29 land.     Now the rest of the acts of Solomon, first and last, be-
           hold they are written in the book of Nathan the prophet, and
           in the book of Achia the Selonite, and in the visions of Joel
      oO the seer concerning Jeroboam son of Nabat.                    And when Solo-
           mon had reigned over all Israel forty years, he slept and was
           buried in the city of David his father, and Roboam his son
           reigned in his stead.
      X.       Now Jeroboam son of Nabat had fled from the presence
        1 of king Solomon, and taken up his abode in Egypt.                       But re-
           ceiving intelligence in Egypt, and being sent for he had return-
        :) ed from Egypt.          So when Roboam went to Sychem (for to
           Sychem all Israel went to make him king) Jeroboam and all
        4 the congregation came to Roboam and said, Thy father made
           our yoke heavy, now therefore abate something of the griev-
           ous service of thy father, and of his heavy yoke, which he laid
        5 on us, and we will serve thee.             Thereupon he said to them,
        b* Go away for three days and then come to me.                        And when
           the people were gone, king Roboam assembled the elders who
           had stood before his father Solomon in his life time, and said
        7 to them, How do you advise me to answer this people ?                       And
           they spoke to him saying, If thou indulge the people this day,
           and soothe them, and speak kindly to them, they will be thy
        8 servants forever.        But he slighted the counsel which the el-
           ders gave him, and consulted the young men, who had been
           brought up with him, and who waited on him, and said to
        9 them, What answer do you advise me to give to this people,
          XI.                II. CHRONICLES.
     Ch.
         who have spoken to me saying, Abate something of the yoke,
     10 which thy father laid upon us.      And the young men, who had
         been brought up with him, spoke to him saying, Thus shalt
         thou speak to this people, who hath spoken to thee saying,
         Thy father made our yoke heavy, do thou therefore lighten it
      11 for us—thus thou shalt say, My little finger shall be thicker
         than my father's loins.    Now therefore my father chastened
         you with a heavy yoke, but I will add to your yoke.        My fa-
         ther chastised you with whips; but I will chastise you with
      12 scorpions.  So when Jeroboam and all the people came to Ro-
         boam on the third day, as the king had spoken saying, Come
         again to me on the third day, the king answered them roughly.
      13 King Roboam slighted the counsel of the elders, and spoke
      14 to them according to the advice of the young men, saying,
         My father made your yoke heavy, but I will add to it ; my
         father chastised you with whips, but I will chastise you with
      15 scorpions.  So the king did not hearken to the people ; for the
         revolution was from God.     And upon one's saying, The Lord
         hath established his word which he spoke by the ministry of
         Achia the Selonite concerning Jeroboam son of Nabat, and all
      16 Israel ; for the king hath not hearkened to them, the people an-
         swered the king, and said, What portion have we in David?
          And what inheritance in the son of Jessai?      To your tents
      17 Israel !  Now David, look thou to thine own house.      So Israel
         went away to their habitations ; and when some men of Israel
         and thev who dwelt in the cities of Juda, had made Roboam
      18 king over them, and Roboam the king sent to them Adoni-
         ram, who was over the tribute, the sons of Israel stoned him
          with stones, till he died. Upon which the king Roboam hast-
      19 ened to mount his chariot to flee to Jerusalem ; and Israel re-
          volted from the house of David to this day.
      XL      Now when Roboam came to Jerusalem and had assem-
          bled of Juda and Benjamin, a hundred and eighty thousand
          of the young men who were warriors, and was going to war
          with Israel, to restore the kingdom to Roboam ; a word of
       2 the Lord came to Samaias, a man of God, saying, Speak to
       3 Roboam son of Solomon, and to all Juda and Benjamin, and
          say, Thus saith the Lord, You shall not go up nor fight with
       4 your brethren.    Return every man to his house, for this thing
       Cb. XII.                   II. CHRONICLES.
           is done by me.      So they hearkened to the word of the Lord,
        5 and did not go up against Jeroboam.            And Roboam dwelt at
        6 Jerusalem and built walled cities in Judea.          He built Bethle-
           hem and Aitan and Thekoe and Bathsura and Sokchoth and
           Odollam and Geth and Marisa and Ziph and Adorai and
           Lachis and Azeka and Saraa and Ailom and Chebron, walled
       11 cities of Juda and Benjamin.         And when he had strengthened
           them with walls, he appointed governors in them, with stores
       12 of provisions, oil and wine.       And in every city he put shields
       13 and spears, and made them very strong.                Now there were
           with him Juda and Benjamin.           And the priests and the Le-
           vites who were in all Israel, resorted to him, from all their
       1-i borders.   For the Levites left the habitations of their posses-
           sion and went to Juda to Jerusalem ; for Jeroboam and his
       15 sons cast them out from ministering to the Lord, and made for
           himself priests of the high places for the idols, and the vani-
       16 ties and the calves which Jeroboam made.             He expelled also
           from among the tribes of Israel them who set their hearts to
           seek the Lord God of Israel, and they came to Jerusalem to
           sacrifice to the Lord God of their fathers, and strengthened the
       17 kingdom of Juda.       So he strengthened Roboam son of Solomon
           three years, because for three years he walked in the ways of
       18 David and Solomon.         Now Roboam took for himself to wife
           Moolath a daughter of Jeriniouth a son of David, and Abigaia
           a daughter of Eliab the son of Jessai, who bore him sons, name-
       19 ly Jeus and Samoria and Zaam ; and after that he took to wife
           Maacha a daughter of Abessalom, and she bore him Abia and
       21 Jetthi and Zoza and Salemoth.           And Roboam loved Maacha,
           daughter of Abessaloni, more than all his wives and concubines,
           (for he had eighteen wives and sixty concubines, and by them he
       22 had twenty eight sons and sixty daughters ; ) so he appointed
           Abia the son of Maacha to be chief and ruler among his brothers.
       23 Because he determined to make him king, therefore he was
          exalted above all his sons in all the borders of Juda and Ben-
          jamin, and in fortified cities.   And he supplied these cities with
          provisions in abundance, and procured for him a multitude of
           wives.
       XII.      But when the kingdom of Roboam was established, and
           when he was become strong, he forsook the commandments of
               VOL. II.                      c
                                                                                                                                      ;;
                                                      II. CHBONICLES.
          Oh. XII.
            2 the Lord, and all Israel with him.                                   And in the fifth year of the
                reign of Koboain, Sousakini king of Egypt came up against Je-
                rusalem, because they had sinned in the sight of the Lord, with
            o twelve hundred chariots and sixty thousand horsemen, but of
                the multitude who came with him out of Egypt, Lybians,
                Trogodytes and Ethiopeans there was no numbering them.
            4 And when they had taken the fortified cities which were in Ju-
            5 da and were coming to Jerusalem, Saruaias the prophet went
                to Koboam and to the chiefs of Juda who were assembled at
                Jerusalem for fear of Sousakim, and said to them> Thus saith
                the Lord, You have left me, therefore I will leave you in the
            6 hands of Sousakini.                        Whereupon the chiefs of Israel and the
            7 king were ashamed and said, The Lord is righteous.                                                               And
                when the Lord saw that they were ashamed, a word of the Lord
                came to Samaias saying, They are ashamed.                                             I will not destroy
                them utterly, but will in a little while grant them deliverance
           8 and my wrath shall not be poured out on Jerusalem.                                                            Never-
                theless they shall be servants, that they may know my service
            9 and the service of the kings of the earth.                                       So Sousakim the king
                of Egypt came up against Jerusalem and took the treasures in
                the house of the Lord and the treasures in the king's house.
          10 All these he took.                      He took also the golden shields which So
                lomon made ; and king lloboam made shields of brass in their
                stead.        Now Sousakim had set over him the chiefs of the guards,
          11 those who guarded the king's gate.                                       So when the king went to
                the house of the Lord, some of his keepers went in with the
                guards, and some who were to bring him back went to meet
          12 the guards.                   But when he became humble the wrath of the
                Lord was turned from him ; for it was not for utter destruction
          13 for still there were good things in Juda.
                       Now when king Koboam strengthened himself in Jerusalem
                and began to reign, he was forty one years old at this commence-
                ment of his reign and he reigned seventeen years in Jerusalem,
                in the city which the Lord had chosen out of all the tribes of
          14 Israel, to put his name there : And his mother's name was
                Noomma the Ammonitess, and he did evil, for he did not di-
          15 rect his heart to seek the Lord.                                  Now the acts of Eoboam, first
                and last, behold are they not written in the book of Samaias
                 the prophet and of Addo the seer ?                                   Also his exploits, for there
           XIII.                II. CHRONICLES.
       Ch.
       16 was a war between him and Jeroboam continually.         And when
          Eoboam died he was buried with his fathers in the city of Da-
          vid, and Abia his son reigned in his stead.
       XIII.      In the eighteenth year of the reign of Jeroboam, Abia
        2 began to reign over Juda.    He reigned three years in Jerusalem,
           and his mother's name was Maacha, a daugter of Uriel of Ga-
        3 baon.   Now there was a war between Abia and Jeroboam.        And
          when Abia had drawn up in array his army consisting of forty
          thousand fighting men, and Jeroboam had drawn up in array
        4 for battle against him with eighty thousand fighting men ; Abia
           rose up from mount Sonioron which is on mount Ephraim and
        5 said, Hearken Jeroboam and all Israel !    Ought you not to know
           that the Lord God, the God of Israel, gave the office of king
           over Israel forever to David and his sons by a covenant of salt ?
        6 Yet Jeroboam the son of Xabat, the servant of Solomon son of
        7 David, rose up and fled from his lord, and there were gathered
           to him wicked factious men, so that he rose up against Eoboam
           the son of Solomon, when he was young and faint hearted and
        8 unable to withstand biin; and now you think of rising up
           against the kingdom of the Lord administered by the suns of
           David.   You indeed are a great multitude, and you have with
           you the calves of gold which Jeroboam hath made for you to
        9 be your gods.    Have you not expelled the priests of the Lord,
           the children of Aaron, and the Levites, and made for yourselves
           priests of the people of every land ?   Whoever came to conse-
           crate himself with a young bull from the herd, and seven rams,
       10 was made a priest to a thing which is no God.       But'as for us,
           we have not forsaken the Lord our God.       His priests the sons
           of Aaron, and the Levites minister to the Lord in their courses.
       11 They burn to the Lord, every morning and evening, the whole
           burnt offering with the sacrifice of compound incense.        We
           have the presence loaves set in order on the pure table, and the
           golden candlestick with the lamps for light, to be lighted every
           evening ; for we keep the watches of the Lord, the God of our
       12 fathers, though you have forsaken him.       Now behold with us,
           at our head, is the Lord and his priests, and the trumpets of
           alarm to sound a charge against you.         sons of Israel, fight
           not against the Lord God of your fathers, for it will not pros-
           per with you.
          Ch. XIY.                                        II. CHRONICLES.
          13            Now Jeroboam had detached an ambuscade to come upon
                 his rear.             He was before Juda and the ambuscade was behind
          14 them.               And when Juda looked back behold the battle was both
                 in front and in the rear.                               Thereupon they cried to the Lord,
                 and the priests sounded the trumpets, and the men of Juda
          15 shouted.                 And when the men of Juda shouted, the Lord smote
          16 Jeroboam and Israel before Abia and Juda.                                                      And the Israelites
          17 fled before Juda, and the Lord delivered them into their hands,
                 so that Abia and his people smote them with a great slaughter,
          18 and there fell of Israel, slain, fifty thousand warriors.                                                           And the
                 Israelites were humbled that day, and the sons of Juda pre-
                vailed because they trusted in the Lord God of their fathers.
          19 And Abia continued the pursuit after Jeroboam and took
                from him the following cities, Baithel with the villages thereof,
                and Jesuna with the villages thereof, and Ephron with the vil-
         20 lages thereof.                       And Jeroboam did not again recover strength
                all the days of Abia.                            And the Lord smote him and he died
                                                                                                                                                ;
         21 but Abia became mighty.                                         Having taken fourteen wives he
          22 had twenty two sons and sixteen daughters.                                                         Now the rest of
                the acts of Abia, his transactions and affairs, are written in the
         XIY.                 book of the prophet Addo.                                    And when Abia died they
                buried him with his fathers, in the city of David, and Asa his
                son reigned in his stead.
            2          In the days of Asa the land of Juda was quiet ten years. And he
            3 did that which was good and right in the sight of the Lord his God.
                 He removed the altars of the strange gods, and the high places,
            4 and broke in pieces the pillars, and cut down the bowers, and
                 ordered Juda to seek the Lord God of their fathers, and to per-
            5 form the law and the commandments.                                                     And having removed
                 out of all the cities of Juda the altars and the idols, he gave
            f)   peace to the fortified cities in the land of Juda : because the
                 country enjoyed peace, and he had no war during those years,
            7 for the Lord gave him rest; therefore he said to Juda, let us
                 rebuild the cities, and make walls and towers, and gates and
                 bars, and secure dominion over the country before them.                                                                  For
                 as we have sought the Lord our God, he hath sought us, and
            8 given us rest all around, and prospered us.                                                      Now xisa had in
                 the land of Juda an army of three hundred thousand men bear-
                 ing shields and spears, and in the land of Benjamin shield
             XV.                      II. CHKONICLES.
       Ch.
            bearers and bowmen, two hundred and eighty six thousand.
         9 All these were fighting men.               And Zare the Ethiopean came
            out against them with an army of a million, with three hundred
       10 chariots.      And when he had advanced as far as Maresa, Asa went
            out to meet him, and drew up for battle, in the vale north of Ma-
       ll resa, and Asa cried to the Lord his God, and said,                      Lord, it is
            nothing with thee to save with many or with few. Strengthen us, O
            Lord our Clod ; for on thee is our reliance ; and in thy name we are
            come against this great multitude.                   Lord our God, let not
            man prevail against thee.            So the Lord smote the Ethiopeans
       12 before Juda.         And the Ethiopeans fled, and Asa and his peo-
       13 pie pursued them as far as Gedor.                   And the Ethiopeans fell
            so that they could not recover themselves ; for they were
       14 trampled down before the Lord, and before his army.                            And
            when they had taken immense spoils, and smitten the towns
            about Gedor (for the terror of the Lord was upon them) and
            had rifled all their cities (for there was much plunder in them)
            and plundered their tents, and smitten the Alimazonians and
            taken many sheep and camels, and were returning to Jerusa-
       XV.         lem ;   the Spirit of the Lord came upon Azarias son of
            Oded, and he went out to meet Asa and all Juda and Benja-
         2 min, and said, Hear me Asa, and all Juda and Benjamin.                         The
            Lord is with you, while you are with him.                    And if you seek
            him, he will be found by you.            But if you forsake him, he will
         3 forsake you.       And though for a long time Israel may be with-
            out the true God, and without a teaching priest, and without
         4 law, yet when they shall turn to the Lord God of Israel, he
         5 will be found by them.            And though at that time there be no
            peace to him who goeth out, or to him who cometh in, be-
            cause the terror of the Lord is on all the inhabitants of these
         (> countries—though nation may fight against nation, and city
            against city, because God hath confounded them with all
         7 kinds of affliction ; yet strengthen ye yourselves, and let not
            your hands be weak ; for your work shall be rewarded.
         8      Upon hearing these words and this prophecy of the pro-
            phet Adad, Asa took courage, and removed the abominations
            out of all the land of Juda and Benjamin, and from all the cities
            lie held from Jeroboam, on mount Ephraim.                     And having de-
            dicated anew the altar of the Lord, which is before the temple
         9 of the Lord, he assembled Juda and the strangers who wor-
                              II. CHEONICLES.
      Ch. XVI.
          shipped with him from Ephraim, and from Manasses, and
          from Symeon, for many of the Israelites had joined him
      10 when they saw that the Lord his God was with him.     And when
          they assembled at Jerusalem in the third month, in the
      11 fifteenth year of the reign of Asa, he offered as a sacrifice to the
          Lord on that day, of the prey which they had brought, seven
          hundred beeves and seven thousand sheep, and entered into a
      12 covenant to seek the Lord God of their fathers, with all their
      13 heart and with all their soul; and that whoever would not seek
          the Lord God of Israel should be put to death, whether young
      14 or old, whether man or woman.     And when they had sworn to
          the Lord with a loud voice, the trumpets and the cornets
      15 sounded, and all Juda rejoiced at the oath ; for they swore with
          their whole heart, and sought him with their whole desire, and
      16 he was found by them.      And the Lord gave them rest round
          about.  Moreover he restrained Maacha his mother from per-
          forming religious service to Astarte. And he cut to pieces the
      17 idol, and burned it by the brook Kedron.    But the high places
      18 were not removed.     They still remained in Israel.   But Asa's
          heart was perfect all his days. And he brought in the dedica-
          tions of his father David, the holy things appertaining to the
          house of God, silver and gold and vessels.
      19     Now Asa was engaged in no war, till the thirty fifth year
      XVI.      of his reign.  But in the thirty eighth year of the reign
          of Asa, the king of Israel came up against Juda, and began
          building Bama, in order to stop all outlet and inlet to Asa
        2 king of Juda ; whereupon Asa took silver and gold, out of
          the treasuries of the house of the Lord, and the king's house,
       3 and sent to the son of Ader king of Syria, who dwelt at Da-
          mascus, saying, Make a covenant between me and thee, as
          there was between my father and thy father.     Behold I have
          sent thee gold and silver, come and remove from me Baasa
        4 king of Israel and let him depart from me.     Accordingly Son
          Ader hearkened to king Asa and sent the generals of his army
          against the cities of Israel, and smote Aion and Dan and Abel-
        5 main, and all the territories adjacent to Nephthaleim.   At the
          news of this Baasa quitted building, and put a stop to the
          work.  Whereupon king Asa took all Juda, and carried away
          the stones of Kama and the timber thereof, with which Baasa
                                  $
      Ch. XVII.               II. CHRONICLES.
       7 was building, and with them built Gabae and Ataspha.            At
         that time Anani the prophet, came to Asa king of Juda
         and said to him, Seeing thou hast put thy trust in the king
         of Syria, and hast not relied on the Lord thy God, therefore
         the army of the king of Syria hath escaped out of thy hand.
       8 Were not the Ethiopeans and the Lybians to be dreaded for
         their huge army?      For their prowess, for their horsemen, for
         their immense multitude ?      Yet because thou didst rely on
       9 the Lord, he delivered them into thy hand.       For the eyes of
         the Lord look throughout the whole earth, to strengthen them
          whose heart is perfect towards him.    In this matter thou hast
      10 acted foolishly.   Henceforward thou shalt have war.         Upon
         this Asa was enraged at the prophet, and committed him to
         prison.   Because this gave offence, Asa proceeded to outrage
      11 against the people at the same time.     Now behold the acts of
         Asa first and last, are written in the book of the kings of Juda
         and Israel.
      12     In the thirty ninth year of his reign, Asa was diseased in
         his feet, till he became very sick ; but in his sickness he did
      13 not apply to the Lord, but to physicians.     And Asa slept with
         his fathers.  He died in the fortieth year of his reign, and they
      14 buried him in the tomb which he had hewn out for himself,
         in the city of David.     And when they had composed him on
         the bed, they filled it with spices, and all kinds of perfumes
         prepared by apothecaries, and made a very great funeral pro-
         cession for him, and Josaphat his son reigned in his stead.
      XVII.      And Josaphat strengthened himself against Israel, and
         put garrisons in all the fortified cities of Juda, and appointed
         governors in all the cities of Juda, and in the cities of Ephraim,
         which his father Asa had taken, and the Lord was with Josa-
       3 phat.   Because he walked in the first ways of his father and
       4 consulted not the idols, but sought the Lord God of his fa-
         ther, and walked in the commands of his father, and not ac-
       5 cording to the works of Israel, therefore the Lord established
         the kingdom in his hand, and all Juda gave gifts to Josaphat,
       6 so that he had riches and honour in abundance : and his heart
         being exalted in the way of the Lord, he removed the high
       7 places and the bowers out of the land of Juda.        And in the
          third year of his reign, he sent with the heads of families these
                              II. CHKONICLES.
      Ch. XVIII.
          rulers of  his,  namely, Abdias and Zacharias and Natha-
       8 niel and Michaias, to teach in the cities of Juda; and with
          them were these Levites, namely Samaias and Nathanias and
          Zabdias and Asiel and Semiramoth and Jonathan and Ado-
          nias and Tobias and Tobadonias who were Levites ; and with
          them Elisama and Joram who were priests, and they taught
       9 in Juda.   Having with them the book of the law of the Lord,
          they went through the cities of Juda, and taught the people.
      10 And there was a dread of the Lord on all the kingdoms of the
          land around Juda, so that they did not make war on Josaphat.
      11 Nay from the Philistines they brought Josaphat silver for their
          gifts. And the Arabs brought him for their gifts, seven thou-
      12 sand seven hundred rams.      And Josaphat advanced in great-
         ness to a high degree, and built castles and strong cities in
      13 Judea, and had many works done for him in Judea.             And
         with regard to the warriors, the mighty men, who strength-
      14 ened him in Jerusalem, this was the number of them accord-
         ing to the houses of their patriarchal families.   The chiliarchs
          for Juda were Edna the chief, and with him sons, mighties
      15 of the army, three hundred chiliads; and after him Joanan
      16 the leader and with him two hundred and eighty chiliads ; and
         after him Amasias the Zarite, who devoted himself to the
      17 Lord, and with him two hundred chiliads, mighties of the ar-
         my; and from Benjamin a mighty of the army, namely Eliada,
         and with him bow men, and those armed with shields, two
      18 hundred chiliads ; and after him Jozabad, and with him eighty
         chiliads, mighties of battle.  All these waited on the king, ex-
         cepting them whom the king placed in the fortified cities
         throughout all Judea.
      XVIII.      Now while Josaphat was still advancing in riches and
       2 great glory, he allied himself by marriage with the house of
         Achab, and after some years, went down to Samaria to Achab.
         And Achab sacrificed sheep and bullocks in abundance for
         him, and the people with him, and made court to him that he
       3 might go with him to Kamoth of Galaaditis.     And when Achab
         king of Israel said to Josaphat king of Juda, Wilt thou go with
         me to Kamoth of Galaaditis, he replied, I am as thou art.      As
       4 is thy people, so is mine with thee for battle.   Then Josaphat
       5 said to the king of Israel, Inquire now I pray thee of the Lord.
       1
      Ch. XVIII.              II CHRONICLES.
         Thereupon the king of Israel assembled the prophets, four
         hundred men, and said to them, Shall I go to Ramoth Galaad
         to battle, or shall I forbear ?   And they said, Go up, for God
       6 will deliver into the king's hands.       Then Josaphat said, Is
         there not here a prophet of the Lord, that we may inquire by
       7 him ?   And the king of Israel said to Josaphat, There is still
         a man, by whom we may inquire of the Lord, but I hate him,
         for he never prophesieth good of me, but always evil—one
         Michaias, son of Jembla.     And Josaphat said, Let not the king
       8 speak so.   Then the king called a chamberlain, and said, Bring
       9 here quickly Michaias, son of Jembla.      Now the king of Israel
         and Josaphat king of Juda, were seated each on his throne, ar-
         rayed in robes, and they sat in the open space at the entrance of
         the gate of Samaria, and all the prophets prophesied before them.
      10 And Sedekias, son of Chanaan, made for himself horns of iron,
         and said, Thus saith the Lord, With these thou shalt push Syria
      1  until it be destroyed.   And all the prophets prophesied in like
         manner, saying, Go up to Ramoth Galaad, and thou shalt pros-
      12 per; for the Lord will deliver into the king's hands. So the mes-
         senger who went to call Michaias spoke to him, saying, Behold
         all the prophets have, with one mouth, spoken good things of the
         king, let thy words, I pray thee, be as one of them, and speak
      13 good things.    To whom Michaias replied, As the Lord liveth,
      14 whatever God shall say to me, that I will speak.      And when he
         came to the king, the king said to him, Michaias, shall I go
         to Ramoth Galaad to battle, or shall I forbear ?      To which he
         replied, Go up that thou mayst prosper, and they be delivered
      15 into your hands !   Then the king said to him, How often must
         I adjure thee that thou speak nothing to me but truth, in the
      16 name of the Lord?      Whereupon he said, I saw Israel scattered
         upon the mountains like sheep, which have no shepherd.         And
         the Lord said, They have no leader, let them return every man
      17 to his house in peace.   Then the king of Israel said to Josaphat,
         Did I not tell thee, that he would not prophesy good of me,
     18 but evil?     And Michaias said, Is not this the case?       Hear a
         word of the Lord : I saw the Lord seated on his throne, and all
         the host of heaven stood, some on his right and some on his
      19 left.  And the Lord said, Who will deceive Achab, king of
         Israel, that he may go up and fall at Ramoth Galaad.           And
             VOL. II.                    d
       Ch. XVIII.             II. CHKONICLES.
       20 when one spoke in this manner and another in that, there came
          forth a spirit and stood before the Lord, and said, I will deceive
       21 him.   And the Lord said, By what means ?     To which he re-
          plied, I will go forth and be a lying spirit in the mouth of all
       22 his prophets.  And he said, Thou wilt deceive and prevail ; go
          and do so.   Now therefore behold, the Lord hath put a lying
          spirit in the mouth of these thy prophets.  But the Lord hath
          spoken evil against thee.
       23     Then Sedekias, son of Chanaan, came near and smote Mi-
          chaias on the cheek, and said to him, Which way went the
       24 spirit of the Lord from me to speak to thee ?     To which Mi-
          chaias replied, Behold thou shalt see on that day, when thou
          shalt go from one inner chamber to another to hide thyself.
       25 Then the king of Israel said, Take Michaias and carry him
          back to Emer the governor of the city, and to Joas the chief,
       2G the king's son, and say, Thus saith the king, Put this fellow
          in prison, and let him be fed with bread of affliction and water
       27 of affliction, until I return in peace. And Michaias said, If
          thou return in peace, the Lord hath not spoken by me.      And
          he said, Hear all people !
       28     Then the king of Israel and Josaphat king of Juda, went
       29 up to Kamoth Galaad, and the king of Israel said to Josaphat,
          Let me disguise myself and I will go into the battle, and put
          thou on my robes.   So the king of Israel disguised himself and
       30 went into the battle. Now the king of Syria had given a charge
           to the commanders of his chariots who were with him, saying,
           Fight neither with small nor great, but only with the king of
       31 Israel.  So when the commanders of the chariots saw Josaphat,
           they said, This is the king of Israel, and wheeled about in or-
           der to attack him, whereupon Josaphat cried aloud, and the
           Lord saved him, and God caused them to turn back from him.
       32 And when the commanders of the chariots saw that it was not
           the king of Israel and turned from him, a man drew a bow at
           a venture and smote the king of Israel between the lungs and
       33 the breast ; whereupon he said to his charioteer, turn thy hand
       34 and carry me out of the battle, for I am wounded.    But as the
           battle was that day disastrous, he was kept in his chariot over
           against the Syrians till the evening, and at the setting of the
           sun he died.
    Oh. XIX.      XX.         II. CHBOXICLES.
    XIX.       Now when Josaphat, king of Juda, was returning to his
      2 house to Jerusalem, .Jehu the son of xVnani the prophet, went
        out to meet him, and said to him, King Josaphat, dost thou aid
      3 a sinner, or form friendship with one hated by the Lord ?         On
        this account there would have been wrath against thee, but for
        the good works which have been found in thee, and for thy
        having removed the bowers out of the land of Juda, and direct-
      ored thy heart to seek the Lord.     So Josaphat dwelt at Jerusalem,
        and again went out to the people from Bersabee to Mount
        Ephraim, and brought them back to the Lord God of their
      5 fathers.  And when he appointed the judges in all the fortified
      6 cities of Juda, city by city, he said to the judges, Take heed
        what you do.     For you judge not for man, but for the Lord,
      7 and with you are the words of the judgment.           Now therefore
        let the fear of the Lord be upon you.      Keep watch and do your
        duty ; for with the Lord our God there is no injustice, nor re-
      8 spect of persons, nor taking of bribes.     In Jerusalem also Josa-
        phat appointed some of the priests and Levites and patriarchs
        of Israel, for the judgment of the Lord, and to judge the in-
      9 habitants of Jerusalem.     And he gave them a charge, saying,
        Thus shall you act, in the fear of the Lord, with truth and with an
     10 upright heart—You must all conjointly determine every cause
        of your brethren who dwell in their cities, which shall come
        before you for decision, between blood and blood, and between
        ordinance and command.        And you shall explain to them the
        rules of rectitude and judgments, that they may not sin against
        the Lord, and that no wrath may come upon you, nor upon
     11 your brethren.     Thus you shall do and not sin.        And behold
         Amarias the priest, is ruler over you for every word of the
         Lord, and Zabdias son of Ismael, the ruler over the house of
         Juda, for every matter touching the king ; and the scribes and
         the Levites are to attend you.     Be firm and do your duty, and
         the Lord will be with the good.
     XX.       After these things the Moabites and the Ammonites, and
         with them some of the Minaians came against Josaphat for
      2 battle ; and there came some who told Josaphat saying, There
         is a great multitude coming against thee from beyond the sea,
         bordering on Syria, and behold they are at Asasan-thamar,
       3 which is Engaddi.      Thereupon Josaphat was terrified, and set
      Ch. XX.                II. CHKONICLES.
          his face to seek the Lord, and proclaimed a fast through all Ju-
       4 da.   And when Juda was assembled to seek the Lord—when
          they were come out of all the cities of Juda to seek the Lord,
       5 Josaphat stood up in the congregation of Juda, in Jerusalem,
          in the house of the Lord, in front of the new court, and said,
       6     Lord the God of my fathers, art not thou God in heaven
          above ? Thou indeed rulest over all the kingdoms of the na-
         tions : and in thy hand is the majesty of power ; and there is
       7 none who can withstand thee.   Art not thou the Lord who de-
         stroyed the inhabitants of this land from before thy people
         Israel?  Thou indeed didst give it to the seed of Abraham
       8 thy beloved, forever: and they have settled therein, and built
       9 therein a sanctuary to thy name, saying, If evils come upon
         us, the sword, judgment, pestilence or famine, we will stand
         before this house and before thee; for thy name is on this
         house ; and cry to thee, because of the affliction, and thou
      10 wilt hear and save.  And now behold the Ammonites and the
         Moabites and mount Seir, through whose territories        thou
         didst not permit Israel to pass, when they were coming out
      11 of the land of Egypt, for they turned from them and did not
         destroy them; yet now behold they are attempting to come
         out against us, to drive us from this inheritance of ours which
      12 thou hast given us.       Lord our God, wilt thou not judge
         them? Because we have not power to withstand this great
         multitude which is coming against us, and do not know what
         to do with them, we can only have our eyes on thee.
      13     And while all the chiefs of Juda were standing before the
      14 Lord, with their wives and children; upon Oziel the son of
         Zacharias of the Banaites—the sons of Eliel, the son of Mat-
         thanias the Levite, one of the sons of Asaph—upon him came
         the spirit of the Lord in the midst of the congregation, and he
      15 said, Hear all ye chiefs of Juda, and ye inhabitants of Jerusa-
         lem, and thou king Josaphat !    Thus saith the Lord to you,
         Be not terrified nor dismayed because of this vast multitude,
      16 for the battle is not yours, but God's only.  Go down against
         them to-morrow.   Behold they are comiug up by the ascent of
         Asseis, and you will find them at the head of the river of the
      17 wilderness of Jeriel. You have not to fight.    Consider these
         things, and see the salvation of the Lord with you.       Juda
                            II. CHRONICLES.
    Ch. XX.
       and Jerusalem, be not terrified nor afraid to go out to-morrow
        to meet them ; for the Lord is with you.
    18     Thereupon Josaphat bowed down on his face, and while
        all the chiefs of Juda and the inhabitants of Jerusalem pros-
       trated themselves before the Lord to worship him, the Levites
    19 of the sons of Kaath, and of the sons of Kore, stood up to
    20 praise the Lord God of Israel, in the loudest strains.And they
       arose early in the morning, and went out to the wilderness of
       Thekoe.   And as they were marching out, Josaphat stood and
        cried with a loud voice, and said, Hear me,   Juda, and ye in-
       habitants of Jerusalem.   Trust in the Lord our God, and you
        shall be confirmed in your confidence.     Confide in his pro-
    21 phet, and you shall prosper.   Then he consulted with the peo-
       ple, and appointed the musicians, and them who sing praises,
       to give thanks and to sing the holy songs of praise.  So march-
    22 ing at the head of the army, they sung the hymn,       praise the
       Lord, for his mercy endureth forever.    And when they began
       the song of thanksgiving and praise, the Lord set a fighting the
       Ammonites against Moab and Mount Seir, who were going
    23 out against Juda ; And when they were repelled, the Ammon-
       ites and Moab rose upon the inhabitants of Seir to extermi-
       nate and destroy them.    And when they had made an end of
       the inhabitants of Seir, they rose up one against the other till
    21 they were utterly destroyed.   So when Juda came to the watch
       tower of the wilderness, and looked and /took a view of the
       multitude, behold they all lay dead on the ground.      Not one
       had escaped.
    25     And when Josaphat and his people went to gather the spoil,
       they found cattle in abundance, and furniture and spoils and
       precious utensils.  And when they had gathered the spoils
        (now they were three days collecting them, for they were
    26 many) on the fourth day they assembled in the valley of
        Praise; for there they praised the Lord, and for that reason
        called the name of that place, Valley of Praise, which it retain-
    27 eth to this day.   Then all Juda with Josaphat their leader, set
    28 out on their return to Jerusalem, with great joy.   Because the
        Lord had caused them to rejoice over their enemies, therefore
        they made their entry into Jerusalem, and nablas and kinyras
    29 and trumpets, till they came to the house of the Lord.      And
           XXI.              II. CHBONICLES.
      Ch.
         there was a dread of the Lord on all the kingdoms of the land,
          when they heard that the Lord fought against the enemies of
      30 Israel.  80 the kingdom of Josaphat enjoyed peace, and God
          gave him rest on every side.
      31     Now Josaphat began to reign over Juda when he was thirty
          five years of age, and he reigned twenty five years in Jerusa-
      32 lem ; and his mother's name was Azuba.      She was a daughter
          of Sali. And he walked in the ways of his father Asa, and
          turned not aside from doing what was right in the sight of the
      33 Lord.   But the high places still remained, and still the people
          did not direct their heart to the Lord the God of their fathers.
      34 Now the rest of the acts of Josaphat, first and last, behold they
          are written among the words of Jehu, son of Anani, who wrote
          the book of the kings of Israel.
      35     After the things above mentioned, Josaphat king of Juda
      36 entered into a partnership with Ochozias, king of Israel, and he
          offended in so doing, and in going to him to build vessels to sail
          to Tharsis. Therefore when he had built vessels at Gesion-
          gaber, Eliezer the son of Dodia, from Marisa, prophesied
          against Josaphat, saying, Because thou hast contracted a friend-
          ship with Ochozias, the Lord hath destroyed thy work, and
         thy vessels are wrecked so that they could not go to Tharsis.
      XXI.      When Josephat slept with his fathers, he was buried in
       2 the city of David, and his son Joram reigned in his stead.  Now
         he had six brothers sons of Josaphat, namely, Azarias and
         Jeiel, and Zacharias and Azarias, and Michael and Zaphatias.
       3 All these were sons of Josaphat king of Juda.  And their father
         gave them many gifts, silver and gold, and arms and walled ci-
         ties in Judea, and gave the kingdom to Joram, because he
       4 was his first born.  And when Joram attained the kingdom,
         and had strengthened himself, he slew all his brothers with the
       5 sword, and some of the chiefs of Israel.  Joram was thirty two
          years old when he came to the throne, and he reigned eight years
       6 in Jerusalem.   And he walked in the way of the kings of Israel,
          and as the house of Achab did ; for his wife was a daughter of
       7 Achab.    But though he did evil in the sight of the Lord, the
          Lord would not utterly destroy the house of David, because of
          the covenant which he had made with David, and because he
          had promised him, to give him and his sons a lamp continually
        ( h. XXII.                                  II. CHRONICLES.
         8 In those days Edom revolted from Juda, and set up a king over
          9 themselves.                And though Joram went with the chiefs and all the
              cavalry with him ; and though it happened that he arose by
              night and smote Edom who had surrounded him, and the
              commanders of the chariots, and the people fled to their tents,
              yet Edom revolted from Juda, and have continued the revolt
        10 to this day.                 At this time also, Lomna revolted from his autho-
              rity, because he had forsaken the Lord the God of his fathers.
        11 For he erected high places in the cities of Juda, and caused
              the inhabitants of Jerusalem to go a whoring, and led Juda
        12 astray.            And there came to him in writing, a message from
              Elias the prophet, saying, Thus saith the Lord God of David
              thy father, Because thou hast not walked in the way of thy fa-
        13 ther Josaphat, nor in the ways of Asa, king of Juda; but hast
              walked in the ways of the kings of Israel, and caused Juda and
              the inhabitants of Jerusalem to go a whoring, as the house of
              Achab hath done, and hast slain thy brothers the sons of thy
        14 father, better men than thyself, behold the Lord will smite thee
              with a great stroke in thy people, and in thy sons and in thy
        15 wives, and in all thy family; and thou thyself shalt be afflicted
              with a grievous sickness and disorder in thy bowels, until thy
              bowels shall come out with the disorder, from year to year.
       16 So the Lord stirred up against Joram, the Philistines and the
        17 Arabians, and those who bordered on the Ethiopeaus ; and
              they came up against Juda and subdued them, and carried
              away all the family which they found in the king's house, with
              his sons and his daughters, so that he had not a son left except
        18 Ochozias the youngest of his sons.                                     And after all this, the Lord
              smote him with an incurable disorder in his bowels, which
        19 continued from year to year.                                  And at the end of two years, his
              bowels came out with the disorder, and he died of a grievous
              sickness.           And the people made no funeral procession for him,
        20 like the procession for his fathers.                                   He was thirty two years old
              when he began to reign, and he reigned eight years in Jerusa-
              lem, and departed unlamented, and was buried in the city of
        XXII.                David, but not in the tombs of the kings ; and the inha-
              bitants of Jerusalem made Ochozias, his youngest son, king in
              his stead.             Because the plundering band of Arabians and Ali-
              mazonians, who had come against them, had slain all the eld-
             XXII.              II. CHKONICLES.
        Ch.
            est, therefore Ochozias, son of Joram king of Juda, was made
            king.
         2     Ochozias was twenty years old when he began to reign, and
            he reigned one year in Jerusalem, and his mother's name was
         3 Gotholia.   She was a daughter of Ambri.       And he walked in
            the way of the house of Achab.       Because his mother was his
         4 counsellor to incite him to sin, therefore he did evil in the
            sight of the Lord, like the house of Achab.   For after the death
         5 of his father, they were his counsellors to his destruction, and
            he walked by their advice, and went with Joram the son of
            Achab, king of Israel, to war against Azael, king of Syria, at
         6 Eamoth Galaad.      And when the archers had smitten Joram,
           and he returned to Jezrael to be cured of the wounds which
           were given him by the Syrians, at Eamoth, when he fought
           Azael, king of Syria; Ochozias, son of Joram, king of Juda,
           went down to see Joram, son of Achab, at Jezrael, because he
         7 was sick.   Now by the determination of God, this coming to
           Joram was the destruction of Ochozias; for when he came,
            Joram went out with him to Jehu, son of Namessi, who was
         8 the anointed of the Lord, to destroy the house of Achab.      And
           it happened, that while Jehu was executing vengeance on the
           house of Achab, he met with the chiefs of Juda and the bre-
         9 thren of Ochozias who attended Ochozias ; and having slain
           them, he ordered search to be made for Ochozias.        And they
           found him under cure at Samaria and brought him to Jehu
           and slew him.    And they buried him ; for they said he is a de-
           scendant of Josaphat, who sought the Lord with his whole
           heart.
        10     Now there was none of the house of Ochozias, capable of
           asserting his claim to the kingdom ; so when Gotholia, the
           mother of Ochozias, saw that her son was dead, she arose and
        11 slew all the royal seed in the house of Juda.   But Josabeth the
           king's daughter, took Joas son of Ochozias—having stolen
           him from among the children of the king who were slain, she
           put him and his nurse in a chamber of beds and hid them.
           Now Josabeth, who was a daughter of king Joram and sister
           of Ochozias, was the wife of Jodae the priest.     So he hid him
           from the sight of Gotholia that she did not kill him ; and he re-
         XXIII.             II. CHEONICLES.
    Oh.
        mained with him hid in the house of the Lord six years, and
        Gotholia reigned over the land.
    XXIII.       But in the eighth year Jodae strengthened himself,
        and took the captains of hundreds, namely, Azarias son of
        Joram, and Ismael son of Joanan, and Azarias son of Obed,
        and IMaasias son of Adia, and Elisaphan son of Zacharias, with
      1 him into the house of the Lord.     And when they had made a
        circuit round Juda, and had assembled the Levites out of all
        the cities of Juda and the chiefs of the patriarchal families of
      3 Israel ;and they were come to Jerusalem, the whole congre-
        gation of Juda, made a covenant with the king in the house
        of God.  Xow when he shewed them the king's son he said to
        them, Behold the king's son !    Let him be king as the Lord
     4 hath spoken to the house of David.        Xow this is what you
        must do, Let the third of you, the priests and Levites, come
        in on the sabbath, to guard the outer gates; and a third of
      5 you be at the king's house, and the other third at the middle
      6 gate; and all the people in the courts of the house of the
        Lord ; and let none enter the house of the Lord, but the priests
        and the Levites.   Such of the Levites as are on duty may
        come in for they are holy.     But let all the people keep the
      7 watches of the Lord.   And let the Levites encompass the king
        round about, every man with his weapon in his hand ; and
        whoever cometh into the house, let him be put to death.     And
        they shall be with the king, when he cometh in and goeth out.
      8 So the Levites and all the chiefs of Juda did according to all
        that Jodae the priest commanded them, and they took every
        man his men, who were to be on duty from the beginning to
      9 the end of the week; for Jodae the priest did not break the
        courses; and Jodae gave them the swords, and shields, and
        arms which belonged to king David, and were in the house
    10 of God.    And when he had stationed all the people every one
        with his arms from the right corner of the house, to the left
     11 corner of the altar, and the house all around about the king,
        he brought out the king's son, and put upon him the ensign
        of royalty, and the testimonies.  And Jodae the priest and his
        sons, proclaimed him king, and anointed him with oil and
    12 said, Live the king! And when Gotholia heard the noise of
        the people running, and proclaiming, and praising the king, she
           VOL. TI.                   E
         Ch. XXLV.               II. CHRONICLES.
            went to the king, to the house of the Lord, and looked, and
         13 lo! the king was on his platform, and at the entrance were
            the chiefs, with the trumpets.   And the chiefs around the king,
            and all the people of the land, were full of joy ; and the trum-
            pets were sounding, accompanied by musicians with their in-
            struments of musick, and the singers singing songs of praise.
            Upon which she rent her robe and cried with a loud voice,
         14 Treason !   Treason !  Thereupon Jodae the priest went out,
            and gave orders to the captains of hundreds, and the chief
            officers of the army, and said to them, Drive her out of the
            house, and go after her and put her to death with the sword.
            Because the priest said, Let her not be put to death in the
        15 house of the Lord, therefore they opened a passage for her, and
            when she had gone out through the horse gate, of the king's
        16 house, they put her to death there.     Then Jodae made a cove-
            nant between the Lord, and the people and the king, that they
        17 would be the Lord's people.      And all the people of the land,
            went to the house of Baal and demolished it, and his altars,
            and broke to pieces his idols, and slew Matthan the priest of
        18 Baal before his altars.    And Jodae the priest committed the
            works of the house of the Lord to the priests and the Levites,
            and re-established the courses of the priests, and the Levites,
            into which David had distributed them.         And they offered
            whole burnt offerings to the Lord, as it was written in the law
            of Moses, with gladness and with hymns, composed by Da-
        19 vid.   And the keepers of the gates attended at the gates of the
            house of the Lord, that none might enter who was in any re-
        20 spect unclean.    Then he took the patriarchs and the mighties,
            and the chiefs of the people, and all the people of the land, and
            they brought up the king to the house of the Lord, thence he
        21 passed through the inner gate to the house of the king, and they
            seated him on the throne of the kingdom ; and all the people
            of the land rejoiced ; for the city was quiet, after they had slain
            Gotholia.
        XXIV.       Joas was seven years old when he began to reign and
            he reigned forty years in Jerusalem, and his mother's name was
         2 Sabia of Bersabee.      And Joas did what was right in the
          3 sight of the Lord, all the days of Jodae the priest.  And Jodae
            took for him two wives who bore him sons and daughters.
          4 And after this it came into Joas's heart, to repair the house of
                                                                                    —
      Ch. XXIV.                   II. CHRONICLES.
       5 the Lord.      Therefore he assembled the priests and the Levites
          and said to them, Go out into the cities of Juda and cullect
          money from all Israel to repair the house of the Lord from
       6 year to year, and use diligence in speaking.            And when the Le-
          vites made no speed, king Joas called Jodae the chief, and said
          to him, Why hast thou not watched over the Levites, to oblige
          them to bring in from Juda and Jerusalem, what is ordained
          by Moses the man of God.            And as he had assembled all Is-
       7 rael to the tabernacle of the testimony, because Gotholia that
          wicked woman and her sons had plundered the house of God,
          and had applied the holy things of the house of the Lord to
       8 the Baalims, therefore the king said, Let a chest be made, and
       9 set at the gate of the house of the Lord on the outside, and
          let proclamation be made in Juda and Jerusalem, to bring in
          for the Lord, as Hoses the servant of God enjoined on Israel,
      10 in the wilderness.       Then all the chiefs and the people gave
      11 they brought, and cast into the chest, until it was full, and
          then the chest was carried by the Levites to the king's over-
          seers.   When they saw that there was much money in it, the
          king's secretary, and the high priest's overseer, emptied the
     J 2 chest, and set it again in its place.        Thus they did from day to
         day.    And when they had collected much money, the king and
         Jodae the priest, gave it to the workmen, for the service of the
         house of the Lord : and they hired masons and carpenters, to re-
         pair the house of the Lord, and manufacturers of iron and brass,
     13 to furnish the house of the Lord with utensils.               So the work-
         men wrought, and the work advanced under their hands, and
         they re-established the house of the Lord in its former state,
     14 and strengthened it.       And when they had finished, they brought
         the remainder of the money, to the king and Jodae.                      And
         when they had made utensils for the house of the Lord, im-
         plements used in the service of burnt offerings, and censers
         of gold and silver, they offered whole burnt offerings in the
         house of the Lord continually, all the days of Jodae.
     15      When Jodae was old, being full of days, he died at the age
         of a hundred and thirty years, and they buried him in the city
     16 of David with the kings, because he had exercised goodness
         with respect to Israel, and with respect to God and his house.
     17 And after the death of Jodae the chiefs of Juda came and paid
                                                                        —;
       Ch. XXV.               IT. CHKONICLES.
       18 homage to the king ; and the kinghearkened to them. And they
          forsook the house of the Lord God of their fathers, and served
          the Astartes and the idols, and there was wrath against Juda
       19 and against Jerusalem at that time.  When he had sent prophets
          to them to turn them to the Lord, and they would not hearken
          when he had testified against them and they would not obey
       20 then the Spirit of God came upon Azarias the priest, the son
          of Jodae, and he stood above the people and said, Thus saith
          the Lord, Why do you transgress the commandments of the
          Lord?    You cannot prosper.    Because you have forsaken the
       21 Lord, therefore he will forsake you.   Upon this they fell upon
          him and stoned him by the command of the king, in the court
       22 of the house of the Lord.  Thus Joas remembered not the kind-
          ness which Jodae his father had done him, but put to death his
          son, and when he was dying he said, May the Lord see and
       23 judge.  And it came to pass that at the end of the year, the ar-
          my of Syria came up against him.     They came up against Juda
          and Jerusalem, and having destroyed all the chiefs of the peo-
          ple, among the people, they sent the spoils of them to the king of
       24 Damascus.    Though the army of Syria consisted of but few men,
          yet God delivered a very great army into their hands, because
       25 they had forsaken the Lord the God oftheir fathers. On Joas also
          he executed judgment : for after they were gone from him, as he
          was left in great distress, his servants conspired against him,
          for the blood of the son of Jodae the priest, and put him to death
          on his bed.    And when he was dead, they buried him in the
       26 city of David, but not in the tomb of the kings.       Now they
          who conspired against him were Zabeb the son of Samaath the
          Ammonite, and Jozabed the son of Samareth the Moabite, and
       27 all his sons, for the five were with him.  Now as for the rest of
          his acts, behold they are written in the book of the kings.  And
          Amasias his son reigned in his stead.
       XXV.        Amasias was twenty fixe years old when he began to
          reign, and he reigned twenty nine years in Jerusalem, and his
        2 mother's name was Joadaen of Jerusalem ; and he did what was
        3 right in the sight of the Lord, but not with a perfect heart.Now
          when the kingdom was established in his hand, he put to death
        4 his servants who had slain the king his father.   But, according
           to the covenant of the law of the Lord, he did not put to death
          Ch. XXV.                                    II. CHRONICLES.
                their children, as it is written—as the Lord commanded saying,
                Fathers shall not be put to death for children ; nor shall child-
                ren be put to death for fathers ; but they shall :die every one
           5 for his own crime.                      Then Amasias assembled the house of Juda
                and appointed them according to the houses of their patriarchal
                families, to be captains of thousands and captains of hundreds
                throughout all Juda and Jerusalem.                                          And having numbered
                them from twenty years old and upwards, he found them to
                be three hundred thousand, able to go forth to war armed with
           6 spears and shields.                      Then he hired from Israel a hundred chi-
                liads, men mighty in power, for a hundred talents of silver.
           7 But there cameto him a man of God and said,                                                    king, the army
                of Israel must not go with thee, for the Lord is not with Israel.
           8 For if thou thinkest to strengthen thyself with any of these
                Ephraimites, the Lord will rout thee before the enemy ; for it
           9 is in the power of the Lord to strengthen or to rout.                                                              And
                Amasias said to the man of God, But what must I do in re-
                spect to the hundred talents which I have given to the army of
                Israel ?         To which the man of God replied, It is in the power of
         10 the Lord to give thee more than that.                                          Then Amasias separated
               from the army which had come to him from Ephraim, that
               they might go to their place.                                   Thereupon they were greatly
               incensed against Juda, and returned to their place in a rage.
         11 And Amasias strengthened himself, and took his own people
               and went to the valley of salt, and there smote of the sons of
         12 Seir ten thousand.                         And the children of Juda took ten thou-
               sand alive and carried them to the top of a precipice, and threw
               them down from the top of the precipice, so that they were all
         13 dashed to pieces.                       Xow the soldiers of the army which Ama-
                sias had sent back, that they should not go with him to battle,
               had fallen on the cities of Juda from Samaria to Baithoron and
               had smitten of them three thousand, and carried off much spoil.
         14 And it happened that after Amasias came from smiting Idu-
               mea, a person brought him the gods of the children of Seir, and
                he           them up to be his gods,                                          r
                      set                                                      and bowed down before them
         ] o and sacrificed to them : therefore the wrath of the Lord was
                against Amasias, and he sent a prophet to him and said to him,
                Why hast thou sought the gods of this people, which could
         16 not deliver their own people out of thy hand?                                                      But while the
               9                                                                                                                          :
             Ch. XXVI.                                  II. CHKONICLES.
                   prophet was speaking to him lie said to him, Have I made thee
                   a counsellor of the king ?                               Forbear, lest thou be scourged.
                   Thereupon the prophet held his peace, for I know, said he,
                   that he hath determined to destroy thee, because thou hast done
             17 this, and hast not hearkened to my counsel.                                                    Then Amasias
                   king of Juda took counsel and sent to Joas, son of Joachaz, son
                   of Jehu, king of Israel, saying, Come and let us look each
             18 other in the face.                     Upon which Joas king of Israel sent to Ama-
                   sias king of Juda saying, The thistle on Libanus sent to the
                   cedar on Libanus saying, Give thy daughter to my son for
                   a wife.          But lo ! the wild beasts on Libanus will come—nay
                   the wild beasts on Libanus did come and trample down the
             1     thistle.         Thou hast said, Behold I have smitten Idumea, there-
                   fore thy stupid heart lifteth thee up.                                         Abide now at home
                   why dost thou take counsel to thy hurt, that thou mayest fall
             20 and Juda with thee ?                          But Amasias would not hearken, for the
                   Lord had determined to deliver him up, because he sought
             21 the gods of the Idumeans.                                  So Joas king of Israel went up;
                   and he and Amasias king of Juda looked each other in the
             22 face at Baithsamys, which belongeth to Juda.                                                   And Juda was
             2o routed before Israel, and fled every man to his habitation.                                                        And
                   Joas king of Israel took Aruasias king of Juda, son of Joas, son
                   of Joachaz, at Baithsamys and brought him to Jerusalem, and
                   broke down of the wall of Jerusalem from the gate of Ephraim
             24 to the gate of the corner, four hundred cubits ; and he took
                   all the gold and silver, and all the vessels found in the house
                   of the Lord, and in the custody of Abdedom ; and the treasures
                   of the king's house, and hostages, and returned to Samaria.
             25 And Amasias the son of Joas, king of Juda, lived after the
                   death of Joas, the son of Joachaz, king of Israel, fifteen years.
             26 Now the rest of the acts of Amasias, first and last, behold, are
                   they not written in the book of the kings of Juda and Israel ?
             27 And when Amasias departed wholly from the Lord, they
                   formed a conspiracy against him ; whereupon he fled from Je-
             28 rusalem to Lachis; but they sent after him to Lachis, and
                    there put him to death, and they brought him up on horses
                    and buried him with his fathers in the city of David.
             XXVI.                 And all the people of the country took Ozias when he
                    was sixteen years old, and made him king in the room of his
                                                                                                                 ;
       Ch. XXVI.                            IT. CHBOXICLES.
         2 father Amasias.              He had rebuilt Ailath and restored it to Ju-
         3 da, after the king slept with his fathers.                                Ozias was sixteen
             years old when be began to reign, and he reigned fifty two
             years in Jerusalem, and his mother's name was Jechelia, of
         4 Jerusalem.            And he did that which was right in the sight of
             the Lord, according to all ihat his father Amasias had done
         5 and he continued to seek the Lord all the days of Zacharias,
             who instructed him in the fear of the Lord.                                 In his days in-
          6 deed he sought the Lord, and the Lord prospered him.                                           And
             he went out and warred against the Philistines, and demolish-
             ed the walls of Geth, and the walls of Jabner, and the walls of
             Azotus, and rebuilt the cities of Azotus, and among the Phi-
          7 listines.        And the Lord strengthened him against the Philis-
             tines, and against the Arabs, who dwelt in Petra, and against
          8 the Minaians.             So that the Minaians gave gifts to Ozias ; for
             his fame reached even to the entrance of Egypt ; for he was
          9 very powerful.               And Ozias built towers in Jerusalem—that
             over the gate of the corner, and that over the gate of the val-
        10 ley, and those on the corners.                      And when he had fortified it, he
             built towers in the wilderness, and dug many wells, for he bad
             much cattle at Sephale, and in the plains, and vine dressers in
             the hilly country, and on Karmel, for he was fond of husband-
        11 ry.       Moreover Ozias had an army of fighting men, which went
              out in array for battle, and came in, in array, to be numbered.
              And they were numbered by Jeiel the scribe and Maasias the
             judge, under the direction of Ananias the king's lieutenant.
        12 The whole number of the chiefs, the officers of the army, was
              two thousand six hundred ; and the army of fighting men
              with them was three hundred and seven thousand five hun-
              dred.      These were trained for battle to assist the king against
        14 enemies.             And Ozias provided for them—for all this army,
              shields and spears, and helmets, and breast plates, and bows,
        15 and slings to cast stones.                        And he made in Jerusalem ma-
              chines, contrived with great art, to be placed in the towers
              and at the corners, for shooting darts and throwing huo-e
              stones.       And the fame of his preparations was spread far and
              wide, for he was wonderfully assisted until he became exceed-
         16 ing strong.           But when he became strong his heart was elated
              to his destruction ; for he trespassed against the Lord his God
                                                                                                                                           ;
                       XXVII.                             II. CHRONICLES.
               Cb.
                     and went into the temple of the Lord to burn incense on the
               17 altar of incense.                   And Azarias the priest went in after him and
               18 with him eighty priests of the Lord, valiant men.                                                        And they
                     withstood king Ozias and said to him, it doth not belong to
                     thee, Ozias, to burn incense to the Lord ; but only to the priests
                     the sons of Aaron who are consecrated to burn incense.                                                            Go
                     out of the sanctuary, for thou hast revolted from the Lord, and
               19 this will not be for honour to thee from the Lord God.                                                       At this
                     Ozias was inflamed with wrath, and had in his hand the censer
                     to burn incense in the temple.                                  But when his anger kindled
                     against the priests, the leprosy broke out on his forehead, be-
                     fore the priests, in the house of the Lord, at the altar of incense.
               20 And when Azarias the chief priest, with the other priests,
                     turned towards him, behold he was leprous on the forehead,
                     so they hurried him out thence.                                    He indeed himself hasted to
               21 go out, because the Lord had convicted him.                                                     So Ozias the
                     king was a leper to the day of his death, and as a leper,
                     dwelt in the house of Apphusoth ; for he was cut off from the
                     house of the Lord, and Joatham, his son, was over the king-
              22 dom, administering justice to the people of the land.                                                      Now the
                     rest of the acts of Ozias, the first and the last, are written by
              23 Jessias the prophet.                          And when Ozias slept with his fathers,
                     they buried him in the field of the burying place of the kings
                     for they said he is a leper.                           And Joatham his son, reigned in
                     his stead.
              XXVII.                   Joatham was twenty five years old when he began
                     to reign, and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem ; and his
                     mother's name was Jerusa.                                 She was a daughter of Sadok.
                2 And he did that which was right in| the sight of the Lord, ac-
                     cording to all that his father Ozias had done ; but he did not go
                3 into the temple of the Lord.                                    Though the people were still
                     corrupt, he built the high gate of the house of the Lord ; and
                4 on the wall Opel he built much.                                       On Mount Juda and in the
                5 forest, he also built castles and towers.                                     He fought the king of
                     the Ammonites and prevailed against him ; so that the Am-
                     monites gave him yearly, a hundred talents of silver and ten
                     thousand cores of wheat, and ten thousand of barley.                                                        These
                     the king of the Ammonites brought him yearly, during the
                 6 first, second and third year.                                 Joatham prevailed because he
      Oh. XXVIII.              II. CHRONICLES.
        7 prepared his ways before the Lord his God.     Xow the rest of
          the acts of Joatham, and his wars and his doings, behold they
       9 are written in the book of the kings of Juda and Israel.    And
          Joatham slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city of
         David, and Achaz his son reigned in his stead.
      XXVIII.        Achaz was twenty years old when he began to
         reign, and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem, and did not
         do what was right in the sight of the Lord, like his father Da-
       2 vid, but walked in the ways of the kings of Israel, and made
       3 graven images ; and for their idols in the land of Benennom he
         actually caused his children to pass through fire, according to
         the abominable acts of those nations which the Lord had rooted
       4 out from before the Israelites.  He burned incense also on the
         high places, and on the tops of houses and under every shady
       5 tree.  So the Lord his God delivered him into the hand of the
         king of Syria, who smote him, and took many of them cap-
         tives, and carried them to Damascus.     He delivered him also
         into the hands of the king of Israel, who smote him with a great
       6 slaughter.  Indeed Phakee, the son of Romelias, king of Israel,
         slew of Juda in one day, a hundred and twenty chiliads of the
         men mighty in power, because they had forsaken the Lord,
       7 the God of their fathers. Zechri also, the chieftain of Ephraim,
         slew Maasias the king's son, and Ezrikan, the leader of his
       8 house, and Elkana, the lieutenant of the king.  And the Israel-
         ites carried away captive, of their brethren, three hundred chi-
         liads, including married women, sons and daughters.        And
      9 they took from them much spoil.      But as they were carrying
         the spoils to Samaria, there was there a prophet of the Lord,
         whose name was Oded, who went out to meet the army com-
         ing to Samaria, and said to them, Behold the anger of the Lord
         God of your fathers is against Juda, and he hath delivered
         them into your hands, and you have slain them with a ra^e
     10 which hath reached up to heaven.      And now you purpose to
        keep the children of Juda and Jerusalem, for men slaves and
         women slaves !  Behold am not I with you to testify to the Lord
     11 your God?    Xow therefore hearken to me, and send back those
        captives whom you have taken of your brethren ; for the anger
     12 of the Lord is on you.    Upon this there arose certain chiefs of
        the Ephraimites, namely, Oudeias the son of Joanas, and Ba-
            VOL. II.                   F
         5
        Ch. XXVIII.              II. CHRONICLES.
           rachias the son of Mosolamotb, and Ezekias the son of Sellem,
           and Amasias the son of Eldai, against them who came from
        13 the war, and said to them, You shall not bring these captives
           here to us, for that would be to bring your guilt on us.      Because
            you have sinned against the Lord, do you mean to lay it on us,
            to add to our sins and to heighten our folly, because our sins
            are many, and the fervent anger of the Lord is hanging over
        14 Israel ?   Thereupon the warriors left the captives and the spoils
        1   before the chiefs and the whole congregation.         And the chiefs
            above mentioned arose and took the captives, and out of the
            spoils cloathecl all who were naked.    And when they had cloath-
            ed them and shod them, and had given them something to eat
            and to anoint themselves, they took up on asses all who were
            weak, and carried them to Jericho, the city of palm trees, to
           their brethren, and then returned to Samaria.
        16     At that time king Achaz sent to the king of Assur for as-
        17 sistance, because the Idumeans had invaded and smitten Juda
        18 and carried off captives.     The Philistines also had fallen upon
            the cities of the plain and in the southern border of Juda, and
            had taken Baithsamus.      But after he had given the king the
            treasures in the house of the Lord, and the treasures in the
            house of the king, and the chiefs, they took Ailon and Galero,
            and Socho, and the villages thereof, and Thamna and the vil-
            lages thereof, and Gamzo and the villages thereof, and settled
        19 there :   Because the Lord humbled Juda on the account of
            Achaz, king of Juda, because he had greatly apostatised from
        20 the Lord, therefore Thalgathphallasar came upon him and af-
        21 flicted him.   Though Achaz took the treasures in the house of
            the Lord, and the treasures in the house of the king, and the
        22 chiefs, and gave them to the king of Assur, yet he was of no
            service to him, but only added to his distress, and contributed
        23 to his apostacy from the Lord.         For king Achaz said, I will
            seek the gods of Damascus who smite me.            Because, said he,
            the gods of the king of Syria strengthen them, therefore I will
            sacrifice to them and they will help me.     But they were the ruin
        24 of him and of all Israel.      Now when Achaz had taken away
            the vessels   of the house of the Lord, and chopped them to
            pieces, he shut up the doors of the house of the Lord, and
        25 made himself altars in every corner of Jerusalem, and erected
                                                                                                                            ;
         Ch. XXIX.                               II. CHKOXICLES.
               high places in every city of Juda, to burn incense to strange
               gods.      So they provoked to wrath the Lord the God of their fa-
         26 thers.          Xow the rest of his acts and his doings, first and last, be-
               hold they are written in the book of the kings of Juda and Israel.
         27 And when Achaz slept with his fathers, he was buried in the
               city of David, but they did not carry him to the tombs of the
               kings of Israel.             xVnd Ezekias his son, reigned in his stead.
         XXIX.               Ezekias was twenty five years old when he began to
              reign, and he reigned twenty nine years in Jerusalem ; and his
               mother's name was Abia.                          She was a daughter of Zacharias.
           2 He did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, according
           3 to all that his father David had done.                                    Accordingly when he
               was settled in his kingdom, in the first month he opened the
           4 doors of the house of the Lord and repaired them.                                                Then he
               brought in the priests and the Levites, and having placed them
           5 on the east side, he said to them, Hearken, ye Levites, sanc-
               tify now yourselves, and hallow the house of the Lord God of
               your fathers, and remove the uncleanness out of the Holies.
           6 Because our fathers apostatised, and did evil in the sight of the
               Lord our God, and forsook him, and turned away their face
           7 from the tabernacle of the Lord, and hardened their neck, and
               shut the doors of the temple and extinguished the lamps, and did
               not burn incense, nor offer whole burnt offerings in this holy
           8 place, to the God of Israel ; therefore the Lord hath been provok-
               ed to wrath against Juda and Jerusalem, and hath made them an
               astonishment and a desolation, and an object of pity, as you see
           9 with your eyes.                For behold your fathers have been smitten with
               the sword, and your sons and your daughters and your wives,
         10 are in captivity, in a strange land, as is now the case.                                        In this si-
               tuation of affairs, I have it now at heart to enter into a covenant
               with the Lord God of Israel, that he may turn away his fierce
         11 anger from us.                   Xow therefore be not backward, seeing the
               Lord hath made choice of you to stand before him, to minister,
               and to be continually employed in his service, and in offering
         12 incense.             Thereupon these Levites arose, namely, Maath, the
               the son of Amasi, and Joel, the son of Azarias of the Kaathites
               and of the Merarites, Kis, the son of Abdi, and Azarias, the
               son of Ilaelel ; and of the Gersonites, Jodad, the son of Zem-
         13 math, and Joadam, who were descendants of Joaeka; and of
           XXIX.              II. CHRONICLES.
       Ck.
          the Elisaphanites, Zanibri and Jeiel ; and of the Asaphites, Za-
       14 charias and Matthanias; and of the Aimonites, Jeiel and Se-
       15 mei; and of the Idithunites, Sainaias and Oziel; and having
          assembled their brethren, they purified themselves according
          to the king's command, in the manner prescribed by the Lord,
       16 that they might purify the house of the Lord.  And the priests
          went into the inner part of the house of the Lord to purify it,
          and threw out all the filth, found in the house of the Lord,
          into the court of the Lord's house; and the Levites took it
       17 up and threw it out into the brook Kedron.     On the first day
          of the first month, at the new moon, they began to purify. And
          on the eighth day of the month, they came to the temple of
          the Lord.   And having purified the house of the Lord in eight
          days, and completely finished on the thirteenth of the first
       18 month, they went to king Ezekias, and said, We have puri-
          fied all that are in the house of the Lord, the altar of whole
          burnt offerings, with the utensils thereof, and the table for the
       19 presence loaves, with its utensils, and have prepared and hal-
          lowed all the utensils which king Achaz polluted in his reign,
          during his apostasy.   Behold they are before the altar of the
       20 Lord:   Thereupon king Ezekias arose early in the morning,
          and having assembled the chiefs of the city, he went up to
          the house of the Lord, and offered up seven young bulls, seven
       21 rams, seven lambs, seven kids of the goats, for a sin offering
          for the kingdom and for the holies, and for Israel. And he or-
          dered the priests, the sons of Aaron, to offer them upon the altar
       22 of the Lord.   So when they slew the young bulls, the priests
          received the blood and poured it against the altar ; and when
          they slew the rams, they poured the blood against the altar ; and
           when they slew the lambs they poured the blood around the
       23 altar.  Then they brought forward the goats, for a sin offeriDg,
           before the king and the congregation ; and they laid their hands
       21 on them; and the priests slew them.      And when they made
           atonement with their blood against the altar, they made it for all
           Israel, because the king said, The whole burnt offerings, and
           the sin offerings are for all Israel.
       25     Now he had stationed the Levites in the house of the Lord
          with cymbals and with nablas and kinyras, according to the
           command of David the king, and of Gad the king's seer, and
   Ch. XXX.                II. CHBONICLES.
       of Nathan the prophet.   For the institution was ordained at the
   26 command of the Lord, by the ministry of prophets.         So the
       Levites stood with the musical instruments of David, and the
   27 priests with the trumpets.    And when Ezekias gave orders to
       carry up the whole burnt offering on the altar, and they began
       to carry it up, the musicians began the song of praise to the
       Lord, and the trumpets sounded in concert with the musical
       instruments of David king of Israel, and all the congregation
   28 worshipped.   And the musicians continued singing, and the
       trumpets sounding until the whole burnt offering was finished.
   29 And when they who carried it up, had completely finished,
   30 the king, and all present, bowed down.      And when they had
       worshipped, Ezekias the king, and the chiefs, ordered the
       Levites to praise the Lord, in the words of David, and of
       Asaph the prophet.    And when they had sung praises with
   31 gladness, they fell on their faces and worshipped.    Then Eze-
       kias addressing the people, said, As you have now filled your
       hands for the Lord, present and bring the sacrifices of thanks-
       giving for the household of the Lord.    Thereupon the congre-
       gation brought up sacrifices and thank offerings for the house-
       hold of the Lord, and every one liberally disposed brought
   32 whole burnt offerings.    And the number for the whole burnt
       offerings, which the congregation offered, was seventy young
   33 bulls, a hundred rams, two hundred lambs.     All these were for
       a whole burnt offering to the Lord.   And there were hallowed
   34 six hundred young bulls and three thousand sheep.        And as
       the priests were but few, and could not flay the whole burnt
       offerings, the Levites their brethren helped them, until the
       work was finished, and until the priests had purified them-
       selves. For the Levites had purified themselves with more
   35 promptitude than the priests.   So the whole burnt offering was
       abundant with the suet of the thank offerings and the libations
       of the burnt offerings.  Thus was the service re-established in
   36 the house of the Lord ; and Ezekias and all the people re-
       joiced, because God had made provision for the people.      For
       the thing was done suddenly.
    XXX.        Then Ezekias sent to all Israel and Juda, and wrote
       letters to Ephraim and Manasses, to come to the house of the
       Lord at Jerusalem, to celebrate the passover to the Lord God
           1
          Oh. XXX.                 II. CHKONICLES.
           2 of Israel.   Now the king, and the chiefs, and all the congrega-
             tion at Jerusalem, had come to a determination to keep the
           3 passover in the second month ; for they could not keep it at
             that time, because a sufficient number of priests was not puri-
           4 tied, nor were the people assembled at Jerusalem.        And as this
           5 was agreed on by the king and the whole congregation, there-
             fore they determined to make proclamation, throughout all Is-
             rael, from Bersabee to Dan, that they might come and keep
             the passover, to the Lord God of Israel, at Jerusalem, because
           6 a multitude had not done it according to the scripture.       So the
             expresses went with letters from the king, and the chiefs, to all
             Israel and Juda, according to the decree of the king, saying,
             Children of Israel, return to the Lord God of Abraham and
             Isaak and Israel, and bring back the remnant who have escap-
           7 ed from the hand of the king of Assur.        And be not like your
             fathers and your brethren, who apostatised from the Lord God
             of their fathers, and whom he delivered up to desolation, as
           8 you yourselves see.     Now therefore be not stubborn as your
             fathers were.   Give glory to the Lord God, and come to his
             sanctuary, which he hath hallowed forever, and serve the Lord
             your God, and he will turn away his fierce indignation from
           9 you.   For by your turning to the Lord, your brethren and
             your children will find compassion in the sight of all those
             who have captivated them ; and he will bring them back to
             this land.   For the Lord our God is gracious and merciful,
             and will not turn away his face from us, if we return to him.
         10 But while the expresses were passing from city to city, through
             mount Ephraim, and Manasses, till they came to Zabulon,
         1   they were treated as cleriders and mockers.        But the men of
             Aser, and some of Manasses and Zabulon were humbled, and
         12 came to Jerusalem, and to Juda.       Now to these the hand of the
             Lord had given one heart to come and do what the king and
         13 the chiefs had commanded by a word of the Lord.              So there
             assembled at Jerusalem much people to keep the festival of
             unleavened bread in the second month—a very great congre-
         14 gation.    And after they had arisen, and demolished the altars
             which were in Jerusalem, and torn to pieces all on which they
             had burned incense to vanities, and thrown them into the brook
         15 Kedron, they killed the paschal lamb on the fourteenth of the
       8
           XXX.                     II.
     CL                                 OHEONICLES.
          second month.        And as the priests and the Levites were hum-
          bled, and had purified themselves, they offered whole burnt
     16 offerings in the house of the Lord, and stood in their station
         according to the disposition made ofthem by the command
          of Moses, the man of God ; and the priests received the blood
     17 from the hands of the Levites.                 Because there were many of
          the congregation who were not purified, therefore the Levites
          had it in charge to hill the paschal lamb, for every one who
     1   had not been able to purify himself to the Lord.                   And because
         most of the people from Ephraim, and 3Ianasses, and Issachar,
         and Zabulon, had not purified themselves, but ate the passover
         contrary to the scripture, therefore Ezekias prayed for them
     19 on this account and said, The good Lord make atonement for
         every heart which hath directed its course to seek the Lord the
         God of their fathers, although not according to the purification
     20 of the sanctuary.           And the Lord hearkened to Ezekias, and
     21 healed the people.           So the Israelites who were at Jerusalem,
         kept the festival of unleavened bread seven days, with great
         joy, joining in the hymns of praise to the Lord, which the
         priests and the Levites performed day by day to the Lord, on
         musical instruments.
     22       And when Ezekias had spoken comfortably to the Levites,
         and them whose understanding was well disposed to the Lord,
         and they had finished the festival of unleavened bread, which
         lasted seven days, offering sacrifices of thanksgiving, and sing-
    23 ing praises to the Lord God of their fathers ; the congregation
         took counsel together to keep other seven days, and kept other
    24 seven days with gladness.              For Ezekias, in behalf of Juda, set
         apart for the congregation, a thousand beeves, and seven thou-
         sand sheep ; and the chiefs, in behalf of the people, set apart a
         thousand beeves, and ten thousand sheep ; and the dedications
    25 of the priests were abundant.              So the whole congregation, the
         priests and the Levites, and all the congregation of Juda, and all
         who were in Jerusalem, and the proselytes who came from Israel,
         and the inhabitants of Judea were filled with joy. And thejoy in
    26 Jerusalem was great.           From the days of Solomon son of David,
         king of Israel, there had not been such a festival in Jerusalem.
    27       Then the priests, the Levites arose and blessed the people,
         and their voice was heard, and their prayer reached his holy
             XXXII.               II. CHRONICLES.
        Ch.
            also took courage and rebuilt all the wall which had been de-
            molished, and the towers, and another outwork, and strength-
            ened the fortifications, of the city of David, and provided many
         6 arms, and appointed military officers over the people; and
            having assembled them before him in the street of the valley
         7 gate, he spoke affectionately to them, and said, Take courage
            and behave like men, and be not terrified nor dismayed, because
            of the king of Assur, and because of all the multitude with him ;
         8 for there are more with us than with him.         With him are arms
            of flesh ; but with us is the Lord our God to save, and to fight
            our battle.   So the people were encouraged by the words of Eze-
         9 kias king of Juda.     After this Sennacherim, king of the Assyri-
            ans, sent his servants against Jerusalem.     While he himself with
            his main army lay before Lachis, he sent to Ezekias king of Ju-
        10 da and to all the Jews in Jerusalem saying, Thus saith Senna-
            cherim king of the Assyrians, On what do you rely, that you
        11 stand a siege in Jerusalem? Doth not Ezekias deceive you, that
            he may deliver you up to death, and to famine, and to thirst
           by saying, The Lord our God will save us out of the hand of
        12 the king of Assur ?     Hath not this same Ezekias demolished his
           altars, and his high places, and given orders to Juda, and to
           the inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying, You shall worship before
        13 this altar, and upon it you shall burn incense?          Will you not
            consider what I and my fathers have done to all the tribes of
           these regions ?     Have the gods of the nations of all this land,
        14 been able to save their people out of my hand ?                 Who is
           this of yours among all the gods of these nations which my
           father destroyed, who were not able to save their people out
           of my hand, that he should be able to save you out of my
        15 hand ?    Now therefore let not Ezekias deceive you, nor cause
           you to trust in this manner.      Do not believe him.      For as there
           is no god of any nation or kingdom who is able to save his
           people out of my hand, or hath been able to save out of the
           hand of my fathers, therefore your God cannot save you out of
        16 my hand.       And besides what his servants spoke against the
           Lord God, and against his servant Ezekias, he wrote a letter
        17 to reproach the Lord God of Israel, and spoke of him saying,
            As the gods of the nations of the earth have not delivered
           their peoples out of my hand, so neither can the God of Eze-
                                                                                                                  ;;
          Ch. XXXII.                           II. CHRONICLES.
          18 kias deliver his people out of my hand.                                  31oreover he cried
               with a loud voice, in the Jewish language to the people of Je-
               rusalem, who were on the walls that he would assist them, in
          19 order to induce them to seize the city.                             And he spoke against
               the God of Jerusalem, as against the gods of the peoples of
          20 the earth, which are the works of men's hands.                                         But when
               Ezekias the king, and Esaias son of Amos the prophet ad-
          21 dressed a prayer concerning these things, and cried to heaven,
               the Lord sent an angel who destroyed every mighty man, and
               warrior, including chief and general, in the camp of the king
               of Assur.          So he returned with shame to his own land, and
               went to the house of his god, and some of them who sprang
          22 from his loins slew him with the sword.                               And when the Lord
               had saved Ezekias, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, out of
               the hands of Sennacherim, king of Assur, and out of the hand
          23 of all men, and had given them rest all around, many brought
               gifts for the Lord to Jerusalem, and presents to Ezekias king
               of Juda.         And he was thenceforth magnified in the eyes of all
               the nations.
          24         In those days Ezekias was sick unto death, and he prayed
               to the Lord, who hearkened to him and gave him a sign.                                         But
               Ezekias did not make a suitable return for the favour confer-
               red on him, but his heart was lifted up, so there was wrath
               against him, and against Juda and Jerusalem.                                        Thereupon
               Ezekias humbled himself for the pride of his heart, both he
               and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so the wrath of the Lord
               did not come upon them, during the days of Ezekias.
         27         Xow Ezekias had riches and exceeding great glory, and
               he amassed for himself treasures of silver and gold and preci-
               ous stones ; and he had store houses for spiceries, and places
         28 for depositing arms and costly utensils ; and cities for storing
         29 corn, wine, and oil ; and towns and stalls for all sorts of cattle
               and cots for his flocks ; and cities which he built for himself
               and a vast multitude of flocks and herds ; for the Lord gave
         30 him substance in great abundance.                             It was Ezekias who stop-
               ped up the upper course of the waters of Geion, and directed
               them under ground to the south west of the city of David.
         31 And he was prospered in all his works.                              But in his transactions
               with the ambassadors from the chiefs of Babvlon, who were
      Ch. XXXIII.            II. CHKONICLES.
         sent to hini to make inquiry touching the miracle which had
         been clone in the land, the Lord left him to himself in order to
      32 try him, to know all that were in his heart.     Now the rest of
         the acts of Ezekias and his goodness, behold they are written
         in the prophesy of the prophet Esaias son of Amos, and in the
      33 book of the kings of Juda and Israel.       When Ezekias slept
         with his fathers they buried him in the uppermost of the tombs
         of the sons of David, and all Juda and the inhabitants of Jeru-
         salem paid him distinguished honours at his death : and Ma-
         nasses his son reigned in his stead.
      XXXIII.       Manasses was twelve years old when he began to
       2 reign, and he reigned fifty five years in Jerusalem, and did evil
         in the sight of the Lord, according to all the abominable acts
         of the nations which the Lord had rooted out from before the
       3 children of Israel. Herestored and rebuilt the high places which
         his father Ezekias had demolished, and erected pillars to the
         Baalims, and made arbours, and worshipped the whole host of
       4 heaven and served them.     Nay, he built altars in the house of
         the Lord, respecting which the Lord had said, In Jerusalem
       5 my name shall be forever—he built altars for the whole host
       6 of heaven, in the two courts of the house of the Lord.      And
         he made his children pass through fire in the land of Benennom.
         And he consulted omens and auguries, and used enchantments
         and encouraged belly speakers and sorcerers, and multiplied
         the ways of doing evil in the sight of the Lord, to provoke him
       7 to wrath.   He actually set up the graven and molten image
         which he had made, in the house of God, of which God had
         said to David, and to Solomon his son, In this house and in
         Jerusalem, which I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel,
       8 I will put my name forever, and I will no more remove the foot
         of Israel from the land which I have given to their fathers, pro-
         vided they be watchful to perform all that I have commanded
         them, according to all the law and the statutes and the judg-
       9 ments, by the hand of Moses.     Now when Manasses had caused
         Juda and the inhabitants of Jerusalem to go astray, and to do
         evil beyond all the nations which the Lord had destroyed from
      10 before the children of Israel ; and the Lord had spoken against
         Manasses and against his people, but they hearkened not, the
         Lord brought against them the chiefs of the army of the king
             4                                                                                                                        —
           Ch. XXXIV.                                 II. GHKONICLES.
                 of Asur, and they took Manasses, and having bound him with
           12 chains and fetters they carried him to Babylon.                                                    And when he
                 was afflicted he sought the favour of the Lord his God, and
                 humbled himself exceedingly before the God of his fathers,
           J 3 and prayed to him, and he hearkened to him and heard his cry,
                 and brought him back to Jerusalem to his kingdom.                                                           So Ma-
                 nasses knew that the Lord himself is God.
           1            Xow after these things he built a wall without the city of
                 David, from the south west, fronting the south in the valley
                  and along the street leading from the fish gate round to Opel,
                 and raised it very high, and appointed military officers in all
           15 the walled cities of Juda.                               And he removed the strange gods
                 and the graven image out of the house of the Lord, and all the
                 altars which he had built on the mount of the house of the
           16 Lord, and in Jerusalem, and without the city.                                                   And having re-
                  paired the altar of the Lord he offered thereon a sacrifice of
                  thanksgiving and praise, and ordered Juda to serve the Lord
            17 God of Israel.                   But still the people sacrificed on the high places,
           18 but it was to the Lord their God.                                        Now the rest of the acts of
                  Manasses, and his prayer to God, and the words of the seers
            19 who spoke to him in the name of the God of Israel ; and how
                  God hearkened to him at the words of his prayer; and all his
                  sins and his apostasies                      and the places on which he built mounts
                                                            ;
                  and erected bowers, and graven images before his conversion
            20 behold they are written among the words of the seers.                                                              And
                  when Manasses slept with his fathers they buried him in the
                  gardenof his house, and Amon his son reigned in his stead.
            21           Amon was twenty two years old when he began to reign,
            22 and he reigned two years in Jerusalem, and did evil in the sight
                  of the Lord as his father Manasses had done.                                                 For to all the
                  idols which his father Manasses had made Amon burned in-
            23 cense, and served them, and did not humble himself before the
                  Lord as Manasses his father had humbled himself.                                                   Because his
            24 son ximon multiplied transgression, therefore his servants rose
                   upon him, and smote him in his house.                                           And when the people
                   of the country had slain those who conspired against king
                   Amon, the people of the country made Josias his son king in
                   his stead.
            XXXIV.                    Josias was eight years old when he began to reign,
      Oh. XXXIV.             II. CHBONICLES.
       2 and he reigned thirty one years in Jerusalem, and did what
         was right in the sight of the Lord, and walked in the ways
         of David his father, without turning to the right or to the left.
       3 In the eighth year of his reign, while he was still a youth, he
         began to seek the Lord the God of his father David.     And in
         the twelfth year of his reign, he began to cleanse Juda and Je-
         rusalem, from the high places and the bowers, and from their
      4 processions around altars, and from the molten images.      And
         having caused to be torn down in his presence, the altars of
         the Baalims, and the high things which were on them, he cut
         down the bowers, and broke in pieces the graven and the
         molten images.   And having beaten them to dust, he strewed
      5 it over the graves of them who had sacrificed to them, and
       6 burned the bones of the priests on the altars.And when he had
         cleansed Juda and Jerusalem, he proceeded on through the
         cities of Manasses, and Ephraim, and Symeon, and Nephtha-
         leim, and the places around them, and tore down the altars,
      7 and the bowers, and chopped to pieces the idols.     And having
         demolished all the high places in all the land of Israel, he re-
         turned to Jerusalem.
      8     And in the eighteenth year of his reign, on purpose to
         cleanse the land and the house, he sent Saphan son of Eselia,
         and Maasa, the ruler of the city, and Juach son of Joachaz
      9 his recorder to repair the house of the Lord his God.    So they
         went to Chelkias the high priest, and gave the money which
         had been brought into the house of God, which the Levites,
         the keepers of the gates had collected from Manasses and
         Ephraim, and the chiefs, and from all the remnant of Israel,
         and from the children of Juda and Benjamin and the inhabi-
     10 tants of Jerusalem—they gave this to the board of works, who
         superintended the house of the Lord ; and these gave it to the
     11 workmen who did the work in the house of the Lord, to fur-
         nish, and to strengthen the house, and they gave to the car-
         penters and the masons, to purchase square stones, and timber
         for planks to cover the houses, which the king of Juda had
     12 destroyed.   Though these men were intrusted with the works,
         yet over them were overseers, namely Jehu and Abdias the
         Levites of the house of Merari, and Zacharias, and Mosol-
     13 lam, of the house of Kaath.    And with regard to all the chiefs
           XXXIV.             II. CHKONICLES.
      Ch.
         of Levi, every one skilled in instrumental musick was over the
         bearers of burdens, and over all the men who executed the
         works, one to every piece of work, and some of the Levites were
      14 scribes and judges and keepers of the gates.      Now when they
         were carrying out the money, which had been brought into
         the house of the Lord, Chelkias the priest found a book of
      15 the law of the Lord, by the hand of Moses.      Whereupon Chel-
         kias addressing Saphan the scribe said, I have found a book
         of the law in the house of the Lord.        80 Chelkias gave the
      16 book to Saphan, and Saphan carried it to the king.        Now he
         had given him also for the king, an account intitled, All the
      17 money delivered to thy servants the workmen.       For when they
         had melted the silver found in the house of the Lord, they
         gave it into the hand of the overseers and into the hand of
      18 them who executed the work.         So when Saphan the scribe
         had explained the account to the king, he said, Chelkias the
      19 priest hath given me a book.      And Saphan read it before the
         king.   And when the king heard the words of the law, he rent
      20 his clothes.   Then the king gave orders to Chelkias, and to
         Achikam, son of Saphan, and to Abdom son of Michaias, and
         to Saphan the scribe, and Asaias the king's servant, saying,
      21 Go and inquire of the Lord for me, and for all the remnant
         of Israel and Juda, touching the words of this book which is
         found ; for great must be the wrath of the Lord, which is kind-
         led against us, because our fathers have not hearkened to these
         words of the Lord, to do according to all that are written in
      22 this book.    Thereupon Chelkias, with those whom the king
         ordered, went to Olda the prophetess, the wife of Sellem son
         of Thekoe son of Aras.       She kept the commandments and
      23 dwelt at Jerusalem in the Masanai. And when they spoke to
         her to that effect she said to them, Thus saith the Lord the
      2-4 God of Israel, Say to the man who sent you to me, Thus saith
         the Lord, Behold I am going to bring upon this place evils—all
         the things which are written in the book read before the king
      25 of Juda.   Because they have forsaken me, and burned incense
         to strange gods, to provoke me to wrath with all the works
         of their hands, therefore my anger is kindled against this place
      26 and cannot be quenched.      But to the king of Juda, who hath
         sent you to inquire of the Lord, thus shall you say, Thus saith
                                                                         —
            XXXV.              II. CHRONICLES.
       Ch.
       27 the Lord the God of Israel, With regard to the words which
           thou hast heard, as thy heart was affected, and thou didst
           humble thyself before me when thou heardst these words of
           mine against this place, and against the inhabitants thereof
          As thou hast humbled thyself before me, and hast rent thy
           garments and wept before me—I have heard saith the Lord.
       28 Behold I will gather thee to thy fathers, and thou shalt be car-
           ried to thy grave in peace, and thine eyes shall not see all the
           evils which I am going to bring upon this place, and upon
       29 them who dwell therein.     And when they brought back word
           to the king, the king sent and assembled the elders of Juda
       30 and Jerusalem; and went up to the house of the Lord, with
           all the chiefs of Juda and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and
           with the priests and the Levites, and all the people small and
           great, and read in their hearing all the words of the book of
       31 the covenant found in the house of the Lord.       Then the king
           stood on the pillar, and made a covenant before the Lord to
           walk before the Lord and to keep his commandments, and his
           testimonies, and his statutes, with his whole heart, and his
           whole soul, so as to perform all the terms of the covenant, writ-
       32 ten in that book ; and he caused all who were in Jerusalem
           and Benjamin to stand to it.   And when the inhabitants of Je-
           rusalem, had made a covenant in the house of the Lord God
       33 of their fathers, Josias removed all the abominations out of all
           the land, which belonged to the children of Israel, and caused
           all who were in Jerusalem, and in Israel, to serve the Lord
           their God.  During all his days he turned not aside from fol-
           lowing the Lord God of his fathers.
       XXXV.        When Josias celebrated the passover to the Lord
           his God, he caused the paschal lamb to be slain, on the four-
        2 teenth day of the first month.     For having set the priests in
           their watches and encouraged them to the works of the house
           of the Lord, he ordered all the Levites who were heads of fa-
           milies throughout all Israel to hallow themselves to the Lord.
        3 And as they had placed the holy ark in the house which Solo-
           mon son of David king of Israel had built, the king said, You
           have nothing to carry on your shoulders ; now therefore at-
        4 tend to the service of the Lord your God, and of his people
           Israel ;and be ready according to the houses of your fami-
      Ch. XXXV.                  II. CHBONICLES.
          lies, and according to your courses, as prescribed by David,
       5 king of Israel, and by his son Solomon ; and attend in the
          house, according to the divisions of the houses of your farni-
       6 lies, on your brethren the people ; and a portion of a patri-
          archal house, on the Levites ; and kill ye the paschal lambs and
          prepare them for your brethren, that they may do according
       7 to the word of the Lord by the ministry of Moses.              Moreover
          Josias dedicated for the people sheep and lambs and kids, all
          for the passover, even for all who were in Jerusalem, to the
          amount of thirty thousand.       He dedicated also three thousand
       8 beeves, these were of the king's own substance.              His chiefs
          also made dedications for the people, and for the priests, and
          for the Levites.      And Chelkias and Zacharias, and Jeiel, the
          chiefs, gave for the priests of the house of God—they gave for
          the passover two thousand six hundred sheep, lambs and kids,
       9 and three hundred beeves, and Chonenias and Banaias, and Sa-
          maias and Nathaniel, his brother, and Asabias, and Jeiel and
          Jozabad, chiefs of the Levites, dedicated for the Levites Hxe
      10 thousand sheep and five hundred beeves for the passover.               So
          the service commenced, and the priests stood in their station,
          and the Levites in their divisions, according to the command of
      11 the king.       And when these killed the paschal lambs, the
          priests received the blood at their hands and poured it out,
      12 and the Levites flayed them, and prepared the whole burnt of-
          fering, to be delivered according to the division by houses of
          families to the heads of the people, that they might offer it to
          the Lord as it is written in the book of Moses, and so till the
      13 morning.      Then they roasted the paschal lambs with fire, ac-
          cording to the ordinance, and boiled the holy meats in the bra-
          sen cauldrons and kettles.      And when all was ready, they ran
          with them to all the heads of the people.        And after this prepa-
      14 ration for them, they prepared also for the priests.             Because
          the priests were employed in offering up the whole burnt offer-
          ings and the suet, continually till night, therefore the Levites
          prepared for themselves and for their brethren, the sons of
      15 Aaron.     And with regard to the musicians, the sons of Asaph,
          who were in their station, according to the commands of Da-
          vid, both Asaph and Aiman and Idithun the king's prophets ;
          and the chiefs and the keepers of the gates, they were not at
          liberty to move from their holy services, for their brethren the
              VOL. II.                      II
       Oh. XXXV.              II. CHBONICLES.
       16 Levites prepared for them.    So all the service of the Lord be-
           ing arranged and set in order on that day, to keep the passover,
           and to offer up the whole burnt offerings on the altar of the Lord
       17 according to the command of king Josias ; all the Israelites who
           were present kept the passover, at that time, and the festival
       18 of unleavened bread, seven days.    There had not been such a
           passover as this in Israel from the days of Samuel the prophet.
           They had not, under any king of Israel, kept such a passover
           as that kept by Josias and the priests, and the Levites, and all
           Juda and Israel who were present, and by all the inhabitants of
        19 Jerusalem, to the Lord.   This passover was kept in the eigh-
           teenth year of the reign of Josias.
              After all these things which Josias did in the house, king
           Josias burned with fire the belly speakers and the diviners, and
           the theraphins and the idols, and the karesims, which were in
           the land of Juda and in Jerusalem, in order that he might esta-
           blish the words of the law, which were written in the book
           which Chelkias the priest had found in the house of the Lord.
           Before him there was none like him, who turned to the Lord
           with his whole heart, and with his whole soul, and with all
           his strength, according to all the law of Moses ; nor after him
           did there arise his like.    Nevertheless the Lord turned not
           away from his great wrath, with which he was incensed against
           Juda, for all the provocations with which Manasses had pro-
           voked him, and the Lord said, I will remove Juda from my
           presence, as I have removed Israel—I have cast off Jerusalem,
           the city which I chose, and the house of which I said, My
           name shall be there.
        20     Now when Pharao Nechao was going up against the king
           of the Assyrians to the river Euphrates, king Josias went out
           to meet him.   Whereupon he sent messengers to him, saying,
           What hast thou,      king of Juda, to do with me ?     I am not
           now coming to war against thee ; and God hath commanded
           me to make haste.     Forbear meddling with God, who is with
        22 me, lest he destroy thee.   But Josias would not turn his face
           from him, but strengthened himself to fight him.    He hearken-
            ed not to the words of Nechao from the mouth of God, but
        23 came to an engagement in the plain of Mageddo.      And the ar-
           chers having discharged a volley at king Josias, the king said
     Ch. XXXVI.              II. CHEOXICLES.
     24 to his servants, Carry me away, for I am badly wounded.      So
        his servants took him out of his chariot and put him into his
         second chariot, which attended him, and brought him to Jeru-
     25 salem, and he died and was buried with his fathers.     And all
        Juda and Jerusalem mourned for Josias.      And Jeremias com-
         posed a song of lamentation for Josias, which all the heads of
        families, both men and women, sung over him, and which
         they continue to sing to this day ; for they established it for
         an ordinance to Israel.  And behold it is written among the
     26 funereal odes.    Now the rest of the acts of Josias, and his
         faith in respect to what were written in the law of the Lord,
     27 and his acts, first and last, behold they are written in the book
        of the kings of Israel and Juda.
     XXXVI.        Then the people of the land took Joachaz son of Jo-
         sias and anointed him, and made him king over Jerusalem in
      2 the room of his father.   Joachaz was twenty years old when he
        began to reign, and he reigned three months in Jerusalem, and
         his mother's name was Amital.   She was a daughter of Jeremias
         of Lobna.  And he did what was evil in the sight of the Lord,
         according to all that his fathers had done.And Pharao Xechao
         bound him at Deblatha in the land of Aimath, that he should
      3 not reign in Jerusalem.   And the king carried him with him to
         Egypt, and imposed on the country a tribute of a hundred ta-
       4 lents of silver and a talent of gold.And Pharao Xechao, made
         Eliakim son of Josias, king over Juda, in the room of his fa-
         ther, and changed his name to Joakim.   And as Pharao Xechao
         took his brother Joachaz, who was carried to Egypt and died
         there, he paid the silver and the gold to Pharao.Then the land
         began to be taxed to give the money at the command of Pharao.
         And every one according to his rank, demanded silver and
         gold from the people of the land, to pay Pharao Xechao.
       5     Joakim was twenty five years old when he began to reign,
         and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem, and his mother's
         name was Zechora.     She was a daughter of Xerias of Eama.
         And he did what was evil in the sight of the Lord, according
         to all that his fathers had done. In his days Xabuchodonosar,
         the king of Babylon, came into the land, and he was his servant
         three years, and then revolted.   Xow after that, when they re-
         volted, the Lord sent against them the Chaldeans, and predato-
           XXXVI.             II. CHKONICLES.
       Ch.
          ry bands of Syrians, and predatory bands of Moabites and
          Ammonites, and of Samaria according to the word of the Lord
          by the ministry of his servants, the prophets.     Moreover the
          anger of the Lord was against Juda, to remove them from his
          presence, because of the sins of Manasses—for all that he had
          committed and for the innocent blood which Joakim had shed.
          He had indeed filled Jerusalem with innocent blood, yet the
        6 Lord was not willing to destroy them utterly.    So Nabuchodo-
          nosar, king of Babylon, came up against him, and bound him
          with fetters of brass, and sent him away to Babylon; and car-
        7 ried away to Babylon a part of the utensils belonging to the
          house of the Lord, and put them in his own temple at Babylon,
        8 Now the rest of the acts of Joakim, and all that he did, behold
          they are written in the book of the journals of the kings of
        9 Juda.  When Joakim slept with his fathers, he was buried at
          Ganozae, with his fathers, and Jechonias his son reigned in his
          stead.  Jechonias was eighteen years old when he began to
          reign, and he reigned three months and ten days in Jerusalem,
      10 and did evil in the sight of the Lord, and at the return of the
          year, Nabuchodonosar sent and brought him to Babylon, to-
          gether with the most precious utensils of the house of the Lord,
          and made Sedekias, his father's brother, king over Juda and
          Jerusalem.
       11    Sedekias was twenty one years old when he began to reign,
       12 and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem, and did what was
          evil in the sight of the Lord his God, and was not brought to
          a sense of shame by Jeremias, the prophet, speaking from the
       13 mouth of the Lord, when he violated his engagements with
          Nabuchodonosar, to the performance of which he had caused
          him to swear by God; but hardened his neck, and strength-
          ened his heart, not to return to the Lord God of Israel.
       14 Now all the nobles of Juda, and the priests, and the peo-
          ple of the land abounded in the commission of the wicked
          abominations of the Gentiles, and had polluted the house of the
       15 Lord in Jerusalem.     And the Lord the God of their fathers
          had sent to them by the ministry of his prophets, rising early,
          and sending his messengers, because he compassionated his
       16 people and his sanctuary.    But they continued to deride his
          messengers, and to despise his words, and insult his prophets,
       Ch. XXXVI.               II. CHRONICLES.
          until the wrath of the Lord ascended against his people—until
       17 there was no remedy.      Therefore he brought against them the
          king of the Chaldeans, who slew their young men with the
          sword in the house of his sanctuary, and had no compassion
          on Sedekias, nor pity for their virgins.     And they carried away
       18 their elders.   He delivered all into their hands—all the uten-
          sils of the house of God, great and small, and all the trea-
          sures of the house of the Lord and all the treasures of the
          king and of the nobles.        All these he carried to Babylon.
       19 And he burned the house of the Lord, and demolished the
          wall of Jerusalem, and burned with fire the palaces thereof,
      20 and utterly destroyed every thing that was beautiful, and re-
          moved to Babylon the few who were left ; and they continu-
          ed to be servants to him and his sons, until the reign of the
       21 Medes; that the word of the Lord by the mouth of Jeremias
          might be fulfilled, That until the land received its sabbaths
          which it ought to have rested, it should keep a sabbath all the
          days of its desolation, to the completion of seventy years.
       22     In the first year of Cyrus king of the Persians, after the
          word of the Lord by the mouth of Jeremias was fulfilled, the
          Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus king of the Persians ; and
          he caused proclamation to be made throughout all his king-
          dom, in writing, saying, Thus saith Cyrus, king of the Per-
          sians, to all the kingdoms of the earth, The Lord God of
          heaven hath given me ; and he hath commanded me to build
          a house for him in Jerusalem, in Judea.         Is there any among
          you of all his people ?   His God be with him, and let him go up.
                               EZBA, OR ESDRAS.
       I.       In the first year of Cyrus, king of the Persians, that
          the word of the Lord by the mouth of Jeremias might be ful-
          filled, the Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus king of the Per-
        2 sians, and he caused proclamation to be made by word of
          mouth, and in writing, throughout all his kingdom, saying,
          Thus saith Cyrus king of the Persians, The Lord God of
          heaven hath given me all the kingdoms of the earth, and hath
          watched over me, that I should build a house for him in Jerusa-
          lem, which is in Judea.    Whoever is amongyou of all his people,
          his God be with him; and let him go up to Jerusalem which
       Ch. II.                  EZRA, OK ESDRAS.
           is in Juclea, and build the house of the God of Israel.            He
           who is at Jerusalem is very God.       Therefore in regard to every
        4 one in every place, who is left, let the men of the place where
           he dwelleth assist him with silver and gold, and furniture and
           cattle, together with a free will offering for the house of God,
          which is at Jerusalem.
        5     Thereupon the heads of the patriarchal families of Juda and
          Benjamin arose with the priests and the Levites, even all whose
          spirit God stirred up, to go and rebuild the house of the Lord
        G in Jerusalem.     And all who were around them strengthened
          their hands with vessels of silver, with gold, with furniture
          and with cattle, and with presents, exclusive of free will offer-
        7 ings.   Moreover Cyrus brought out the vessels of the house
          of the Lord, which Nabuchodonosar had taken from Jerusalem,
        8 and deposited in the house of his God.         These which were un-
           der the care of Mithridates the treasurer, Cyrus, king of the
           Persians, caused to be brought out and counted to Sasabasar,
        9 the chief of Juda ; and this was the number of them ; thirty
           goblets of gold, and a thousand goblets of silver, vessels of
       10 an unusual form twenty nine, golden cups, thirty; and silver
           plated cups, four hundred and ten, and other vessels, a thou-
       11  saud.   All the vessels of gold and silver, all that came up with
           Sasabasar from the captivity from Babylon to Jerusalem, were
           five thousand four hundred.
       II.     Now these were the children of the province who came up
           from the captivity—from the distant abode to which Na-
           buchodonosar king of Babylon had sent them away to Baby-
           lon, and who returned to Jerusalem and Juda, every chief to
           his city.
        2      The number of the people of Israel who came with Zoroba-
           bel, Jesus,   Nehemias,    Saraias,   Reelias,  Mordecai,    Balasan,
           Masphar, Baguai, Beum, Baana, the head men.
        3      The children of Phares, two thousand one hundred and
           seventy two.
        4      The children of Saphatia, three hundred and seventy two.
        5      The children of Ares, seven hundred and seventy five.
        6      The children of Phaath Moab, descendants of Jesus and
           Joab, two thousand eight hundred and twelve.
        7      The children of Ailam, one thousand two hundred and
           fifty four.
                                                         :                                                                       :
                     II.                                   EZRA, OE ESDEAS.
            Oh.
              8           The children of Zatthua, nine hundred and forty five.
              9           The children of Zakchu, seven hundred and sixty.
            10            The children of Banni, six hundred and forty two.
            11            The children of Babai, six hundred and twenty three.
            12            The children of Asgad, a thousand two hundred and twen-
                   ty two.
            13            The children of Adonikam, six hundred and sixty six.
            14            The children of Bague, two thousand and fifty six.
            15            The children of Addin, four hundred and fifty four.
            1G            The children of Ater, descendants of Ezekias, ninety eight.
            17            The children of Bassou, three hundred and twenty three.
            18            The children of Jora, a hundred and twelve.
            19            The children of Asum, two hundred and twenty three.
            20            The children of G-aber, ninety five.
            21            The children of Bethlaem, a hundred and twenty three.
            22            The children of Netopha, fifty six.
            23            The children of Anathoth, a hundred and twenty eight.
            24             The children of Azmoth, forty three.
            25             The children of Kariathiariin, Chaphira and Beroth, seven
                   hundred and forty three.
            26            The children of Rama and G-abaa, six hundred and twenty
                   one.
            27             The men of Machnias, a hundred and twenty two.
            28            The men of Baithel and Aia, four hundred and twenty
                   three.
            29             The children of Nabu, fifty two.
            30            The children of Magebes, a hundred and fifty six.
            31            The children of Elamar, a thousand two hundred and fifty
                   four.
            32            The children of Elam, three hundred and twenty.
            33            The children of Lodacli and Ono, seven hundred and
                   twenty five.
            34            The children of Jericho, three hundred and forty five.
            35            The children of Senaa, three thousand six hundred and
                   thirty.
            36            And of the Priests,
                          The children of Jedua of the house of Jesus, nine hundred
                   and seventy three
            37             The children of Emmer, a thousand and fifty two
                                                              ::
                  Ch. II.                                                     EZRA, OR ESDRAS.
                  38                 The children of Phassur, a thousand two hundred and forty
                               seven :
                  39                 The children of Ereru, a thousand and seven.
                  40                 And of the Levites,
                                     The children of Jesu and Kadrniel, descendants of Oduia,
                           seventy four
                  41                 The musicians.                                The children of Asaph, a hundred and
                           twenty eight
                  42                 The hcejpers of the Gates.                                              The Sellumites, the Aterites, the
                           Telrnonites, the Akubites, the Atitaites, the Sobaites, all these
                           were a hundred and thirty nine :
                  43                 The Nathinims, namely, the Southias', the Asuphas', the
                  44 Tabaoths', the Kades', the Siaas', the Phadons', the Labanos',
                  46 the Agabas', the Akubs', the Agabs', the Selamis', the Anans',
                  48 the G-eddels', the Gaars', the Raias', the Rasons', the Neko-
                  50 das', the Gaserus', the Asos', the Phases', the Basis', the Ase-
                           nas', the Moouninis', the Nephusims', the Bakbuks', the Aku-
                  52 phas', the Arurs', the Basaloths', the Maoudas', the Arsas',
                  54 the Barkos', the Sisaras', the Themas', the Nastkics', the Ata-
                  55 phas ' ;                     The children of Solomon's servants—the Sotais', the
                  56 Sepheras', the Phaduras', the Jehelas', the Darkons', the Ge-
                          dels', the Saphatias', the Atils', the Phacheraths', the Aseboe-
                           ims', the Hemeis', all the Nathinims including the Abdesel-
                           mas', were three hundred and ninety two.
                  59                 And these were they who came up from Thelmelech,
                           Thelaresa, Cherub, Edan, Emmer, but could not shew the
                           house of their family, nor their seed, whether they were of Is-
                           rael—the children of Dalaia, the children of Bua, the children
                           of Tobiu, the children of Nekoda, six hundred and fifty two.
                  61                And of the children of the priests—the children of Labeia,
                           the children of Akkus, the children of Berzellai, who took to
                           wife one of the daughters of Berzellai the Galaadite, and was
                  62 called by their name—These sought their register among the
                           Methoesim, but were not found.                                                                    Though they were related
                           to the priesthood, yet the Athersastha ordered them not to eat
                           of the most holy meats until there should arise a priest with the
                           Manifestation and the Truth.
                  64                 The whole congregation, together, amounted to forty two
                           thousand three hundred and sixty, exclusive of their men ser-
      Ch. III.                  EZRA, OK ESDRAS.
          vants and maid servants, amounting to seven thousand three
          hundred and thirty seven.        And among them were two hundred
      66 choristers of both sexes.         Their horses were seven hundred
          and thirty six ; their mules two hundred and forty five ; their
          camels four hundred and thirty five; their asses six thousand
          seven hundred and twenty.
      68      Now some of the chiefs of families when they came to the
          house of the Lord at Jerusalem, offered free will offerings for
      69 the house of God, to raise it on its foundations.           According: to
          their ability they contributed to the treasure for the work, sixty
          one thousand mnas of pure gold, and five thousand mnas of
      70 silver, and a hundred garments for the priests.               Though the
          priests and the Levites, and some of the people, and the musi-
          cians, and the keepers of the gates, and the Nathinims, settled
          in their cities, and all the chiefs of Israel in their cities, yet
      III.      when the seventh month was come, the Israelites who
          were in their cities, even the whole people, like one man, assem-
        2 bled at Jerusalem.      And Jesus the son of Josedek with his bre-
          thren the priests, and Zorobabel the son of Salathiel with his
          brethren, arose and rebuilt the altar of the God of Israel, that
          they might offer thereon whole burnt offerings according to
        3 what is written in the law of Moses the man of God.                   And
          when they had erected the altar on its basis, because it was
           done with a dread upon them, on account of the neighbouring-
          people, the whole burnt offering for the morning, and also for
        4 the evening, was offered up thereon to the Lord. But when they
          had celebrated the festival of tabernacles, according to what
          was written, and offered the whole burnt offering day by day
        5 in number as prescribed, the set number for every day—after
           this they offered the continual burnt offerings in due course, and
           those for the new moons, and for all the festivals dedicated to
           the Lord, and for every one who offered a free will offering to
           the Lord.
        6      On the first day of the seventh month they began to offer
           whole burnt offerings to the Lord, though the foundation of
        7 the house of the Lord was not laid ; but they had given money
           to the stone cutters and carpenters, and meat and drink and oil
           to the Sidonians and Tyrians, to bring cedar timber from Li-
           banus to the sea of Joppa, according to the permission granted
               VOL. II.                      I
          IV.              EZRA, OR ESDRAS.
      Oh.
       8 them by Cyrus king of the Persians.- And in the second year
         of their corning to the house of God at Jerusalem, in the second
         month, Zorobabel the son of Salathiel, and Jesus the son of
         Josedek with the rest of their brethren, the priests, and the
         Levites, and all who came from the captivity to Jerusalem,
         made a beginning.
             Now they had appointed the Levites from twenty years old
       9 and upwards over them, who did the works in the house of
          the Lord, so there were over the workmen employed at the
         house of the Lord, Jesus with his sons and brethren, Kadmiel
         with his sons, the sons of Juda, the sons Enadad, their sons and
      10 their brethren the Levites. And while they were laying the
         foundations of the house of the Lord, the priests attended in their
          robes, with trumpets, and the Levites, the Asaphites, with cym-
      11 bals, to praise the Lord in the manner prescribed by David king
          of Israel, and they raised their responsive strains, in the song
          of praise and thanksgiving to the Lord For it is good; for to
          everlasting his mercy enclurcth for Israel.And all the people
          shouted with a great shout, to praise the Lord, at laying the
      12 foundation of the house of the Lord.  But many of the priests
          and Levites, and the old chiefs of families, who with their
          eyes had seen the former house on its foundations, and now
          saw this, wept aloud, while the people were shouting for joy
       13 to swell the song ; so that the people could not distinguish the
          shouts of joy from the sound of the people's wailing.
       IV.    Because the people shouted with a loud shout, therefore
          the noise was heard at a great distance ; and when tbey who
          afflicted Juda and Benjamin heard that the children of the cap-
          tivity were building a house for the Lord God of Israel, they
        2 came to Zorobabel and to the chiefs of the families, and said,
          Let us build with you, for we, like you, seek our God, and we
          sacrifice to him, from the days of Asaradan, king of Assur,
        3 who brought us here.  But Zorobabel and Jesus, and the other
          chiefs of the families of Israel, said to them, It is not allowable
          for us, and you, to build a house to our God, for we ourselves
          assembling together are to build for the Lord our God, as
        4 Cyrus the king of the Persians hath commanded us.      Upon
          this the people of the land began to weaken the hands of the
        5 people of Juda, and they impeded their building, and coun-
                                      :
                      IV.                                   EZRA,
             Ch.                                                             OE ESDBAS.
                    sellors were hired to frustrate their design, all the days of Cy-
               6 rus king of the Persians, and even to the reign of Darius king
                    of Persia.
                           In the reign of Assuerus, even in the beginning of his reign,
                    they wrote a letter against the inhabitants of Juda and Jerusa-
               7 lem.             And in the days of Arthasastha, Tabeel in concert with
                    Mithridates, and the rest of his fellow servants, wrote to Ar-
                    thasastha king of the Persians—the collector of the tribute
               8 drew up a writing in Syriack ; and Eeum Baltani and Sanip-
                    sa the secretary, wrote a translation of it, as their joint letter
               9 against Jerusalem, to Arthasastha the king saying, This hath
                    been agreed on by Reuin Baltam, and Sampsa the secretary,
                    and the rest of our fellow servants, the Beinaians, Apharsa-
                    thachaians,                Tarplialaians,                  Apharsaians,                  Archuaians,                  Babylo-
            10 nians, Susanachaians, Davaians, and the rest of the nations,
                   whom the great and the honourable Assenaphar transplant-
                    ed, and settled in the cities of Somoron, and the rest of the
             11 country on this side the river.                                            This was the purport of the
                   letter which they sent to him,
                           To Arthasastha the king., thy servants, the men beyond
                    the river
            12             Be it known to the king, that the Jews who came up from
                    thee to us, have come to Jerusalem, that rebellious and wick-
                    ed city, and are rebuilding it.                                        The walls of it are repaired,
            13 and they have reared up the foundations of it.                                                               Now therefore
                   be it known to the king, that if this city be rebuilt, and the
                    walls therefore completed, no tribute will be paid to thee, nor
            14 will they do homage.                                   Now as this is injurious to kings, and
                   it is not meet for us to see the king's dishonour, we have there-
            15 fore sent to inform the king, that he may examine the book
                   of the records of thy fathers, by which thou wilt find, and
                   know that this is a rebellious city, and hurtful to kings and
                   countries, and that there are asylums for slaves in the midst
                   of it, from time immemorial, for which cause this city was
            16 laid waste.                     We therefore certify the king, that if this city
            17 be rebuilt, and the wall thereof reared up, there will be no
                   peace for thee.                    To which he replied.
                           The king, to Reum Baltam, and Sampsa the secretary, and
                   to the rest of their fellow servants, who dwell in Samaria and
       Ch. V.                EZBA, OE ESDRAS.
       18 the rest beyond the river, greeting, and saith, The collector
          of the tribute, whom you sent to us, hath been called before
       19 rne, and I gave orders and we have examined and found, that
          this city from time immemorial hath set itself up against kings
       20 and that there are seditions in it, and asylums for slaves ; and
          that there have been mighty kings in Jerusalem, who have
          exercised dominion over the whole country beyond the river ;
       21 and that great tribute, and tolls have been paid to them.   Now
          therefore give orders to stop those men ; for that city must
       22 not be built any more.   See that you merit praise in executing
          this, lest peradventure the desolation be fitted up to the pre-
          judice of kings.
       23     When king Arthasastha's collector of tribute had read this
          in the presence of Beum Baltam, and Sampsa the secretary,
          and his fellow servants, they marched in haste to Jerusalem,
          and through Juda, and with horsemen and an army caused
       24 them to stop.   So a stop was put to the work of the house of
           God in Jerusalem, and it continued stopped till the second
           year of the reign of Darius, king of the Persians.
       Y.       When Aggaius the prophet and Zacharias the son of
           Addo prophesied against the Jews who were in Juda and Jeru-
        2 salem—in the name of the God of Israel against them ; then
           arose Zorobabel the son of Salathiel, and Jesus son of Josedek,
           and began to build the house of God which is at Jerusalem ;
        3 and with them were the prophets of God helping them.      At that
           time Thanthani the chief governor on this side the river, and
           Satharbouzani, and their fellow servants, came to them and
           spoke to them in terms to this effect, Who hath ordered you
           to build this house, and renew this theatrical entertainment?
        4 And they said to them, What are the names of the men who
         5 are building this city ? Now the eyes of God were on the cap-
           tivity of Juda, so that they did not cause them to stop until the
         6 matter was laid before Darius.    So there was sent to the col-
           lector of the tribute, touching this affair, the substance of a let-
           ter, which Thanthani the chief governor on this bank of the
           river, and Satharbouzani, and their fellow servants the Aphar-
           sachaians who were on this bank of the river, should send to
         7 king Darius.   They sent to him a verbal message, and by him
           the following letter was written :
          VI.              EZEA, OR ESDKAS.
     Ch.
      8     To Darius the king, all peace.    Be it known to the king,
         that we went to the province of Judea, to the house of the great
         God, which they are building with choice stones.       Timbers
         are actually laid in the walls, and the work is going on fast and
      9 prospereth in their hands ; We then questioned the elders and
         said to them, Who hath given you orders to build this house,
     10 and renew this theatrical entertainment ?  We then asked their
         names that we might acquaint thee, that we might transmit to
     11 thee in writing the names of their principal men.     Thereupon
         they answered us to this effect saying, We are the servants of
         the God of the heaven and the earth, and we are rebuilding his
     12 house which was built many years ago.    A great king of Israel
         actually built it and fitted it up for them ; but when our fathers
         provoked to wrath the God of heaven, he delivered them into
         the hands of Nabuchodonosar king of Babylon the Chaldean,
         who destroyed this house and removed the people to Babylon.
     13 But in the first year of Cyrus the king, Cyrus the king made
     14 a decree that this house of God should be rebuilt : and the ves-
         sels of gold and silver belonging to this house of God which
         Nabuchodonosar had taken from this house in Jerusalem and
         put in the king's temple, these Cyrus the king caused to be
     15 brought out of the king's temple and gave them to Sabanasar
         the treasurer who was over the treasure, and said to him, Take
         all these vessels and go and deposit them in the house at Jeru-
     16 salem, in their places.  At that time Sabanasar himself came
         and laid the foundation of this house of God at Jerusalem ; and
         from that time till now it hath been a building, and is not yet
     17 finished.  Now therefore if it seemeth good to the king, let
         search be made in the treasury of the king of Babylon, that thou
         mayst know whether a decree hath been made by Cyrus the
         king, to rebuild this house of God at Jerusalem : and let the
         king, when informed touching this matter, send to us.
     VI.     Thereupon Darius the king passed a decree, He hath
         caused search to be made in the libraries where the royal trea-
       2 sure is kept at Babylon, and there hath been found in the city,
         in the royal palace, a roll, in which is written this memoran-
      3 dum, In the first year of king Cyrus, Cyrus the king made a
         decree concerning the holy house of God at Jerusalem, Let the
         house be built, and the place where they offer sacrifices.More-
           5
             VI.                 EZRA, OR ESDRAS.
        Ch.
            over he hath fixed the dimensions, the length sixty cubits and
         4 the breadth sixty cubits.        And there are to be three strong sto-
            ries of stone and one of wood ; and the expence is to be defray-
         5 ed out of the king's house : And let the vessels of the house of
            God, both of silver and gold, which Nabuchodonosar took out
            of the house in Jerusalem, and brought to Babylon, be given,
            and go back to the temple at Jerusalem, to the place where they
          G were deposited in the house of God.              Now therefore you go-
            vernors beyond the river, Satharbouzani, and you their fellow
            servants the Apharsachaians, who are beyond the river, keep
          7 at a distance from that place.        Letthe work of the house of God
            alone.    Let the rulers of the Jews, and the elders of the Jews
          8 build the house of God in its place.              Furthermore, by me a
            decree is made in regard to what you may do for the elders of
            the Jews, that the house of God may be built.            Out of the king's
             substance, the tributes beyond the river, let the expence be
             carefully paid to those men, that they may not be forced to stop ;
          9 and whatever they may stand in need of, such as young bulls
             and rams and lambs for whole burnt offerings to the God of
             heaven, wheat, salt, wine and oil, according to the order of the
         10 priests at Jerusalem—let whatever they ask be given them day
             by day, that they may offer continually to the God of heaven
             sweet smelling sacrifices, and pray for the life of the king and
         11 his sons.     Moreover by me a decree is made, that if any man
             counteract this mandate, a beam be taken from his house, and
             that he being suspended, be executed thereon, and his house
         12 confiscated.     And may the God whose name dwelleth there, de-
             stroy every king and people who shall stretch forth their hands
             to alter or destroy the house of God which is at Jerusalem.                I
             Darius have passed the decree.         Let it be strictly observed.
         13      Upon this Thanthani the chief governor on this side the
             river,  and Satharbouzani and his fellow servants conformed
         14 strictly to what Darius the king sent.            And the elders of the
             Jews and the Levites went on with the building by the prophe-
             sying of Aggaius the prophet, and Zacharias the son of Addo,
             and they rebuilt and fitted it up again by the decree of the God
             of Israel, and by the decree of Cyrus and Darius, and Artha-
         1   sastha, kings of Persia ; and having finished the house on the
             third day of the month Adar, in the sixth year of the reign of
          Xll.
     Ch.                      EZKA, OK ESDBAS.
     16 king Darius, the children of Israel, the priests and the Levites,
         and the rest of the children of the captivity, kept the dedication
     17 of the house of God with joy, and offered for the dedication of the
         house of God, a hundred young bulls, two hundred rams, four
         hundred lambs, and twelve he goats, for a sin offering, for all
      18 Israel, according to the number of the tribes of Israel.         And
         they set the priests in their courses, and the Levites in their
         divisions over the service of God at Jerusalem, according to
      19 the writing of the book of Moses.       And on the fourteenth day
         of the first month, the children of the captivity kept the pass-
      20 over.   For the priests and the Levites had purified themselves
         till all were pure.   And the Levites killed the paschal lambs for
         all the children of the captivity, and for their brethren, the
      21 priests, and for themselves. So the children of Israel who were of
         the captivity, and every one who had separated himself from the
         impurity of the nations of the land and had come to them to
      22 seek the Lord God of Israel, ate the passover, and kept the
         festival of unleavened bread seven days, with joy ; for the Lord
         had made them joyful, and had turned the heart of the king
         of Assur to them, to strengthen their hands in the works of the
         house of the God of Israel.
      VII.     Now after these things in the reign of Arthasastha, king of
         the Persians, came up Esdras, son of Saraias, son of Azaraias,
         son of Chelkias, son of Seluru, son of Sadduk, son of Achitob,
          son of Samaria, son of Esria, son of Mareoth, son of Zaraia,
          son of Ozias, son of Bokki, son of Abisue, son of Phineas, son
       6 of Eleazar, son of Aaron, the first priest.   This Esdras who came
          up from Babylon, was a ready scribe in the law of Moses, which
       7 the Lord the God of Israel had given to Israel.       And when the
          king gave him leave, because the hand of the Lord his God was
          upon him in all that he sought, there came up to Jerusalem some
          of the children of Israel, and some of the priests, and some of
          the Levites, namely, the musicians and the keepers of the gates
          and the Nathinims in the seventh year of Arthasastha, the king;
       8 and they arrived at Jerusalem in the fifth month of the said
       9 seventh year of the king.     For on the first day of the first month
          he settled his journey up from Babylon, and on the first day
      10 of the fifth month they arrived at Jerusalem.          For the good
          hand of his God was upon him, because Esdras had set his
           VII.             EZKA, OE ESDKAS.
       Ch.
          heart to seek the law, and to do and to teach in Israel the
          statutes and the judgments.
       11    Now this is the copy of the decree which Arthasastha
          gave to Esdras the priest, the scribe of the book of the words
          of the commandments of the Lord, and of his statutes to Israel.
       12    Arthasastha king of kings, to Esdras, scribe of the law
          of the Lord, the God of heaven. "Let thy requests be granted.
       13 This is my answer.  By me a decree is made, That every one
          of the people of Israel in my kingdom, and of the priests, and
          Levites, who is of his own free will minded to go to Jerusa-
       14 lem, is sent on behalf of the king, and the seven counsellors,
          to go with thee to guard to Judea, even to Jerusalem, by the
          law of their God, which is in thy hand, for the house of the
       15 Lord, the silver and the gold, which the king and the coun-
          sellors have freely offered to the God of Israel, who dwelleth
          in Jerusalem, and all the silver and the gold which thou canst
       16 procure in all the country of Babylon, with the free will offerings
          of the people and the priests who make free will offerings to
          the house of God which is at Jerusalem; enroll thou there-
       17 fore in this book every one who freely cometh to thee.  The
          bulls, rams and lambs, with their sacrifices and their liba-
          tions—these thou shalt offer on the altar of the house of your
       18 God in Jerusalem.   And if it seemeth good to thee and thy
          brethren, to do any thing with the rest of the silver and the
       19 gold, do it as it shall please your God ; but the vessels which
          are given thee for the service of the house of God, deliver up
       20 in the presence of God in Jerusalem.   And whatsoever more
          may be wanted for the house of thy God, which thou mayst
          think ought to be given, give that out of the king's treasure
       21 houses and on my behalf.  I Arthasastha the king, have given
          an order on all the treasuries which are beyond the river, that
          whatever Esdras the priest and scribe of the God of heaven
       22 shall require of you, be done with all readiness to the amount
          of a hundred talents of silver, and to the amount of a hun-
          dred cores of wheat, and to the amount of a hundred bats of
          wine, and a hundred bats of oil, and salt without limitation.
       23 Whatever is commanded by the God of heaven, let it be
          done.  Take heed that no one offer any insult to the house of
          the God of heaven, lest there be wrath against the realm of
                                                                                                                                       ::
           Ch. VIII.                                  EZRA, OR ESDRAS.
           24 the king and his sons.                             Moreover, in respect to all the priests
                 and the Levites, the musicians, the keepers of the gates, the
                 Nathiniins, and those employed in the service of the house
                 of God, this hath been notified to you, Take no toll of them.
                 Thou shalt have no authority to exercise dominion over them.
           25 And thou Esdras ! as the wisdom of God is in thy hand, ap-
                 point scribes and judges, that they may administer justice to
                 all the people beyond the river, to all such as know the law
                 of thy God, and to such as know it not you shall make it
          26 known.               And whoever will not readily perform the law of God,
                 and the law of the king, upon him let judgment be passed,
                 whether it be to death or to correction, or to confiscation of
                 goods, or to imprisonment."
          27           Blessed be the Lord the God of our fathers who thus put
          2S it in the king's heart to glorify the house of the Lord which is
                 at Jerusalem, and who gave me favour in the eyes of the king
                and his counsellors, and of all the officers of the king who
                were high in office.                         As for me, I strengthened myself, as
                the good hand of God was upon me, and assembled from
                among Israel chiefs to go up with me.
          VIII.              Now these are the heads of families, the leaders
                 who came up with me in the reign of Arthasastha king of
            2 Babylon.               Of the children of Phineas, Gerson : of the chil-
            3 dren of Ithamar, Daniel : of the children of David, Attus
                of the children of Sachania, even of the children of Phoros,
            4 Zacharias, and with him a band of a hundred and fifty : and
                of the children of Phaath-moab, Eliana, son of Saraia, and
            5 with him two hundred males : and of the children of Zathoes,
                Sechenias, son of Aziel, and with him three hundred males
            6 and of the children of Adin, Obeth, son of Jonathan, and
            7 with him fifty males : and of the children of Elam, Isais, son
            8 of Athelia, and with him seventy males : and of the children
                of Saphatia, Zabadias, son of Michael, and with him eighty
            9 males : and of the children of Joab, Abadia, son of Jeiel, and
          10 with him two hundred and eighteen males : and of the chil-
                dren of Baani, Selimuth, son of Josephia, and with him a
          11 hundred and sixty males : and of the children of Babi, Zacha-
          12 rias son of Babi, and with him twenty eight males : and of
                the children of Asgad, Joanan son of Akkatan, and with him
                         VOL. II.                                         k
       6
      Ch. VIII.               EZRA, OR ESDKAS.
      13 a hundred and ten males : and of the children of xVdonikain,
          the under chiefs, and these were their names, Eliphalat, Jeel and
      14 Samaia, and with them sixty males : and of the sons of Bagui,
      15 Outhai and Zabud, and with them seventy males. And when I had
          assembled them at the river which runneth to Evi, we encamped
          there three days. And I inquired among the people and among the
          priests, and not finding any of the sons of Levi there, I sent for
      1   Eleazar, Ariel, Senieia and Alonam and Jarib and Elnatham, and
      17 Nathan and Zacharias and Messollam and Joarim and Elnathan,
          and despatched these men'of understanding to the chiefs at Mo-
          ney of the place, and put words in their mouth to speak
          to the brethren of the Athinims at Money of the place,
      18 that they might bring us choristers for the house of our
          God.   So they came to us, as the good hand of our God
          was over us, chief Sachon of the children of Mooli son
          of Levi, son of Israel.    Indeed his sons and brethren, being
      19 eighteen, came instantly, and brought Asebias and Isaia of the
      20 sons of Merari : his brethren and his sons were twenty ; and of
          the Nathanims, whom David and the chiefs gave for the service
          of the Levites, two hundred and twenty Nathanims were all
      21 assembled by names.      Then I proclaimed a fast there at the ri-
          ver Avue, that we might humble ourselves in the presence of
          our God, and inquire of him the straight road for us, and our
          children, and all our substance ; for I was ashamed to ask of
      22 the king a band of soldiers and horsemen, to protect us from
          enemies on the way ; for we had spoken to the king, saying, The
          hand of our God is over all them for good, who seek him ; and
          his power and his wrath is against all them who forsake him.
      23 So we fasted and besought our God for this, and he hearkened
      21 to us.   Then I set apart twelve of the chiefs of the priests, Sa-
      25 raia and Asabaia, and with them ten of their brethren, and I
          weighed out to them the silver and the gold, and the vessels
          which were dedicated to the house of our God, which the king
          and his counsellors, and his chiefs, and all the Israelites there,
       26 had dedicated—I weighed into their hands six hundred and
          fifty talents of silver, and a hundred vessels of silver and a hun-
       27 dred talents of gold, and twenty gilt cups, worth about a thou-
          sand drachms, and vessels of fine burnished brass, precious as
       28 gold, and said to them, You are holy to the Lord, and these
                                                                                                                    ;
         Ch. IX.                             EZRA, OR ESDEAS.
               vessels are holy, and the silver and the gold are free will offer-
         29 ings to the Lord God of our fathers.                             Watch and keep them,
               until you weigh them before the chiefs of the priests and the
              Levites, and the chiefs of the families in Jerusalem, into the
         30 tabernacles of the house of the Lord.                               And when the priests
               and the Levites had taken the weight of the silver and the gold,
         31 and the vessels to carry them to Jerusalem, to the house of our
               God, we removed from the river Avue, on the twelfth of the
         32 first month, to come to Jerusalem.                           And the hand of our God
               was with us, and delivered us from the hand of enemies, and
          33 of such as lay in wait on the way.                         And when we came to Jeru-
               salem, and had rested three days, we, on the fourth day, deli-
               vered the silver and gold and vessels, in the house of our God,
               into the hand of ^Terimoth, son of Ouria the priest, when there
               was with him, Eleazar son of Phineas, and with them Jozabad,
          34 son of Jesus, and Xoadia, son of Banaia, the Levites, all by
               number and by weight, and the whole weight was taken down
          35 in writing.            At that time, they who came from the captivity,
               the children of them who had been carried away, offered as
               whole burnt offerings to the God of Israel, twelve young bulls
               for all Israel, ninety six rams, seventy seven lambs, twelve
          36 goats, for a sin offering.                   All these were whole burnt offerings
               to the Lord.            Then they gave the king's decree to the king's
               lieutenants and governors beyond the river, and they paid due
                respect to the people and to the house of God.
          IX.          When these things were done, the chiefs came to me and
                said, The people of Israel, and the priests and the Levites,
                have not separated themselves from the. neighbouring tribes.
                In their abominations, the Ethites, the Pherezites, the Jebu-
                sites,    the Ammonites, the Moabites, and the ~\Ioserites, and
            2 the Amorites, are the same with the Chananites.                                  For they have
                taken some of their daughters for themselves, and their sons
                and the holy seed is mingled with the tribes of the neighbour-
                ing regions.           And the hand of the chiefs is principally con-
            3 cerned in this transgression.                     And when I heard this I rent my
                garments, and started up and tore the hair of my head and my
             4 beard.         Then I sat down mourning.                       And there assembled to
                me every one who, in the defection of the captivity, continued
                to follow the word of the God of Israel : but as for me, I con-
                                                                      —;;
       Ch. IX.              EZRA, OR ESDRAS.
        5 tinned sitting disconsolate, till the evening sacrifice.And at
          the evening sacrifice I arose from rny humiliation—having
          rent my garments, I rose up, and fell upon my knees, and
        6 spreading forth my hands to the Lord God, I said :—      Lord,
          I blush, and am ashamed to lift up, O my God, my face to
          thee ; because our iniquities are multiplied over our head, and
        7 our transgressions are heaped up to heaven.  From the days of
          our fathers we are in great transgression, even to this day.
          And for our inquities, we and our kings and our children,
          have been delivered into the hand of the kings of the nations,
          to the sword and to captivity, and to spoiling, and to confusion
        8 of face, as at this day. Now, though our God hath had com-
          passion on us, so as to suffer a remnant of us to escape, and to
          give us a fixture in the place of his sanctuary, that he may en-
          lighten our eyes, and give us a little reviving in our bondage ;
       9 Though we are slaves, the Lord our God hath not quite forsaken
          us, but hath extended mercy to us in the sight of the kings of
          Persia, to give us a reviving, by their raising up the house of
          our God, and repairing the desolations thereof, and giving us
      10 an enclosure in Juda and Jerusalem.      What must we say,
          our God?    After this we have forsaken the commandments
          which thou gavest us by the ministry of thy servants, the pro-
      11 phets, saying, The land which you are going to possess, is a
          land subject to change by the removal of the people of the
          nations for their abominations, with the filth of which they
      12 have filled it from one end to the other ; now therefore, give not
          your daughters to their sons, nor take any of their daughters for
          your sons ; nor shall you seek their peace or their welfare for-
          ever, that you may be strong, and eat the good things of the
          land, and leave it for an inheritance to your children forever.
      13 Nowafter all that is come upon us for our evil deeds, and for this
          our great transgression ; though there is no God like our God
          though thou hast blotted out our iniquities and given us deli-
      14 verance; yet we have returned to break thy commandments,
         and to intermarry with the people of these regions.     Be not
          provoked against us to our utter destruction, so that not a rem-
      15 nant may escape.       Lord God of Israel, thou art gracious
         for a remnant of us have escaped, as at this day.   Behold we
           X.                   EZRA, OR ESDRAS.
      Ch.
          are before thee in our transgressions, though there is no stand-
          incr before thee for this.
       X.      Now when Esclras had prayed and made publick confes-
          sion, weeping and praying before the house of God, there as-
          sembled to him a very great congregation, men, women and
        2 youths.    Because the people wept and made loud lamentation,
          therefore Sechenias, son of Jeel, of the children of Elam, ad-
          dressing Esdras, said, We have broken covenant with our God
          and have taken strange wives of the people of the land ; but still
       3 there is hope in Israel concerning this.         Now therefore let us
          make a covenant with our God, to put away all these wives
          and those born of them as thou shalt advise.         Arise, and cause
          them to tremble at the commandments of our God, and let
       1 what the law requireth be done.          Arise, for the matter resteth
          with thee, and we are with thee.         Take courage and proceed
       5 to action.     Upon this, Esdras arose and exacted an oath of the
          chiefs, the priests and Levites, and all Israel, that they would
       6 conform to this determination.        And when they had taken the
          oath, Esdras went from the house of God to the treasury office
          of Joanan, son of Elisab.     Though he went there, he neither ate
          bread nor drank water, for he mourned for the transgression of
       7. the captivity. And they issued a proclamation through Juda and
          Jerusalem, to all the children of the captivity to assemble at Je-
       8 rusalem, and that whoever did not come within three days, ac-
          cording to the order of the chiefs and the elders, all his substance
          should be anathematised, and he himself should be excommuni-
       9 cated from the congregation of the captivity. Accordingly all the
          men of Juda and Benjamin, assembled at Jerusalem within the
          three days.    It was now the ninth month.         On the twentieth
          of this month all the people sat in the street of the house of
          God, because of their consternation at the decree, and because
      10 of the weather.     And Esdras the priest arose, and said to them,
          You have broken covenant and taken strange wives to add
      11 to the transgression of Israel ; now therefore, give praise to the
          Lord God of our fathers, and do what is well-pleasing in his
          sight, and separate yourselves from the people of the land, and
      12 from your strange wives.      In reply to which, all the congrega-
          tion said, We take upon us the performance of this great thing
      13 which thou hast spoken; but the people are numerous and the
                                                                                                                              ;;:
            Ch. X.                                EZRA, OE ESDRAS.
                  weather stormy, so that we cannot stand out of doors, and this
                  is not a work of one or two days ; for we have multiplied trans-
            14 gression in this respect.                       Let our chiefs, we pray thee, attend
                  and let all those in our cities who have taken strange wives
                  come at appointed times, and with them the elders of each re-
                  spective city, and the judges, that they may turn away from
                  us the fierce anger of our G-od for this matter.
            15          Besides Jonathan son of Asael, and Josias son of Thekoe,
                  there were with me in this business, Mesollam and Sabbathai
            16 the Levite who assisted them. And this was the manner in which
                  the children of the captivity acted.                               There were set apart Es-
                  dras the priest, and head men of families for every house, and all
                  who were named were to return on the first day of the tenth
            17 month, to make strict inquiry into this matter.                                               And when
                  they had finished with all the men who had taken strange
                  wives, having continued the examination to the first day of
            18 the first month, there were found of the sons of the priests,
            19 who had taken strange wives—of the sons of Jesus son of Jo-
                  sedek these brethren of his, Maasia and Eliezer and Jarib
                  and Gadalia, and they gave their hand to put away their wives,
            20 and offered a trespass ram of the flock, for their transgres-
            21 sion : and of the sons of Emmer, Anani and Zabdia : and of
                  the sous of Eram, Masael and Elia and Samaia and Jeel and
            22 Ozia : and of the sons of Phasur, Elionai, Maasia and Ismael
            23 and Nathaniel and Josabad and Elasa.                                    And of the Levites, Jo-
            24 zabad and Samu and Kolia, the same is Kolitas, and Phetheia
                  and Juda and Eliezer : and of the musicians, Elisab : and of the
            25 keepers of the gates, Solmen and Telmen aud Oduth.                                                       And
                  of*   Israel—of the sons of Phoros, Ramia and Azia, and Mel-
            26 chia and Meamin, Eleazar and Asabia and Banaia: and of
                  the sons of Elam ; Matthania, and Zacharia and Jaiel and Ab-
            27 dia and Jarimoth and Elia : and of the sons of Zathua, Eli-
            28 onai, Elisub, Matthanai and Armoth and Zabad and Oziza
                  and of the sons of Babei ; Joanan, Anania and Zabu and Thali
             29 and of the sons of Banui ; Mosollam, Mulluch, Adaias, Jasub
            30 and Saluia and Remoth : and of the sons of Phaath Moab,
                  Edne and Chalel and Bania and Maasia, Matthania, Beseleel
             31 and Banui and Manasse : and of the sons of Eram ; Eliezer,
             33 Jesia, Melchia, Samaias, Semeon, Benjamin, Balneh, Sama-
                                                                                                                ;
       Ch. X.                             EZRA, OR ESDEAS.
            ria: and of the sons of Aseni ; Metthania, Matthatha, Zadab,
       84 Eliphalet, Jeranii, Manasse, Semei: and of the sons of Bani
            Moodia, Amram, Ouel, Banaia,                             Badaia,       Chelkia,        Ovuania,
       37 Marimoth, Eliasiph, Matthania, Matthanai :                                  and the sons of
       38 Banui, and the sons of Semei had done so, namely, Selemia
            and Nathan and Adia, Machadnabu, Sesei, Sariu, Ezriel and
            Selemia and Samaria and Sellnm, Amaria, Joseph : and of the
       48 sons of Nabu; Jael, Matthanias, Zabad, Zebennes, Jadai and
       44 Joel and Banaia.                 All these had taken strange wives and had
             children by them.
                                                 NEHEMIAS.
       I.            The words of Nehemias, son of Chelkia.
         2        In the month Chaseleu of the twentieth year, when I was
             at Snsanabira, Anani, one of my brethren, came with certain
             men of Juda, and I inquired of them concerning the remnant
         3 who were left of the captivity, and concerning Jerusalem ; and
             they informed me that the remnant of the captivity who were
             left, were in that country in great affliction and reproach , and
             that the walls of Jerusalem continued demolished, and that
         4 the gates thereof were burned with fire.                                Upon hearing this
             report, I sat down and wept and mourned some days, fasting
         5 and praying before the God of heaven, and I said, I beseech
             thee,         Lord, God of heaven, the Mighty, the Great and the
             Awful, who keepest thy covenant and thy mercy with them
          6 who love thee and keep thy commandments, let thine ear, I
             beseech thee, be attentive, and thine eyes open, that thou
             mayst hear the prayer of thy servant which I now make be-
             fore thee day and night, for the children of Israel thy servants,
             and plead for their sins which we have committed against thee.
          7 Both I and my father's house have sinned against thee.                                          We
             have broken covenant with thee, and have not kept the com-
             mandments, and the statutes, and the judgments, which thou
          8 gavest in charge to thy servant Moses.                              Remember, I beseech
             thee, the word which thou didst give in charge to Moses thy
              servant, saying, When you break covenant with me, and I
          9 scatter you among the nations ; if you then return to me and
              keep my commandments and do them, though your disper-
            II.                     NEHEMIAS.
        Oh.
           sion may be to the farthest part of heaven, thence I will gather
           them and bring them to the place which I have chosen for
        10 my name to dwell there.     Now they are thy servants and thy
           people, whom thon hast redeemed with thy great power, and
        11 with thy strong hand.    Turn not away, I beseech thee,     Lord.
           But let thine ear be attentive to the prayer of thy servant, and
           to the prayer of thy children, who desire to fear thy name : and
           prosper, I beseech thee, thy servant this day, and grant him
           favour in the sight of this man.
       II.     Now I was the king's butler, and in the month Nisan of the
           twentieth year of king Arthasastha, the wine being before me, I
           took the wine, and when I had given it to the king (now there
         2 was .none besides me in waiting) the king said to me, Why is
           thy countenance sad, and thou not at thine ease ? this is nothing
           but grief of heart.   At this I was greatly terrified and said to
         3 the king, Let the king live forever !  Why should not my coun-
           tenance be sad, seeing the city, the house of my father's se-
           pulchre, is in a state of desolation, and the gates thereof burned
         4 with fire ? Thereupon the king said to me, For what dost thou
           make request ?   And when I had prayed to the God of heaven,
         5 I said to the king, If it seemeth good to the king, and if thy
           servant shall find favour in thy sight, that thou wouldst send
           me to Juda to the city of the sepulchres of my fathers, and let
         6 me rebuild it.  Upon this the king said to me (now his concu-
           bine was sitting by him) For how long shall thy journey be,
         7 and when wilt thou return ?   So the king being pleased to send
           me, I set him a time and said to the king, If it seemeth good
           to the king, let him give me letters to the governors beyond
           the river, that they may conduct me on in my journey till I come
        8 to Juda ; and a letter to Asaph, the keeper of the king's forest,
           that he may supply me with timber to cover the gates and for
         9 the wall of the city, and for a house to which I may go.   So the
           king gave me, as the hand of God was favourable, aad I came
           to the governors beyond the river, and delivered them the
           king's letters.
       10      Now the king sent with me captains of the army and horse-
           men.   But when Sanaballat the Aronite and Tobia the servant,
           the Ammonite, heard this, it grieved them that a man was come
           to promote the welfare of the children of Israel.
                                                                                                                                        ;;
          Ch. III.                                          NEHEMIAS.
          11           Now when I came to Jerusalem and had been there three
                days, I arose by night, I and a few men with me, but I did not
                tell a man what God had put into my heart to do for Jerusalem
          13 and there was not a beast with me but that on which I rode
                and I went out at the gate Golela on to the mouth of the well
                of fig trees, and on to the dung gate, tracing the wall of Jeru-
                salem which had been demolished, and the gates of which
          14 were burned with fire.                            Then I passed on to the gate of Ain
          15 and to the king's pool.                           But there being no place for the beast
                 under me to pass, I continued going up by night along the
                 wall of the valley.                     And having hastily traced the wall, and
          16 come to the valley gate, I returned.                                            Now the watchmen did
                 not know why I went nor what I was doing ; for I had not yet
                told the Jews, nor the priests, nor the nobles, nor the officers of
          17 the army, nor the rest who were to do the work.                                                       Then I said
                 to them, You see the distress in which we are !                                                 How Jerusa-
                 lem is a waste, and the gates thereof have been given to the
                 flames.          Come, let us build up the wall of Jerusalem that we
          18 may no longer be a reproach.                                      And when I told them of the
                 good hand of God which was upon me, and the words which
                 the king spoke to me, and said, Let us arise and build ; their
          19 hands were strengthened for this good work.                                                  But when Sana-
                 ballat the Aronite, and Tobia the servant the Ammonite and
                 Gesem the Arab heard, they laughed at us, and came to us
                 and said, What is this which you are doing ?                                                Are you going
                 to rebel against the king ?                             In reply to which I said, The God
                 of heaven will prosper us, as we his servants are pure and
                 will go on with the building ; but you have no portion, nor
                 right, nor memorial in Jerusalem.
          III.            So Eliasub the high priest arose with his brethren the
                 priests, and having built the sheep gate, they consecrated it
                 and set up the gates thereof.                                They consecrated as far as the
                 tower of the hundred, and to the tower of Anameel, even to
            2 the work performed by the chiefs of the children of Jericho
                 and to the work performed by the children of Zakchur son
            3 of Amari.                And the fish gate was built by the sons of Asana.
                 Having covered it, they covered also the doors thereof and
            4 the locks and bars thereof.                             And next to them the chief of the
                 children of Ramoth son of Ouria, son of Akkos, continued on
                       VOL. II.                                          L
                                                                                                                   ;
           Oh. III.                                  NEHEMIAS.
                the work.          And next to them Mosollam son of Barachias, son
                of Mazebel continued it on.                    And next to them it was continu-
             5 ed on by Sadok son of Baana.                       And next to them the Thekoites
                continued it, but their nobles did not put their neck to their
             6 work.        And Joida son of Phasek and Mesulam son of Basodia
                repaired the gate Jasanai.                     They covered it and set up the
             7 doors thereof, and the locks and the bars thereof.                               And next to
                them Maltias the Gabaonite and Evaron the Meronothite,
                the chiefs of Gabaon and Maspha continued the repairs to the
             8 throne of the governor on this side the river.                             And next to him
                Oziel son of Arachias with the gold smiths continued the re-
                pairs, and next to them Ananias a chief of the apothecaries for-
                tified, and they left Jerusalem behind them to the broad wall.
             9 And next to them the fortifications were carried on by Kaphaia
                son of Sur, the chief of one half of the environs of Jerusalem.
           10 And next to them Jedaia son of Eromaph fortified over against
           11 his house.           And Attuth son of Asabania fortified next to him.
                And the next who fortified was Melchias son of Eram, then
                Asub son of Phaath-moab ; and they continued on to the tow-
           12 er of Thanurim.                And next to him the fortifications were con-
                tinued by Sallum son of Alloes, the chief of the half of the en-
           13 virons of Jerusalem—by him and his daughters.                                      The gate of
                the valley was secured by Anun and the inhabitants of Zano.
                They built it and set up the doors thereof, and the locks and
                the bars thereof, and built a thousand cubits of the wall even to
           14 the dung gate.               And the dung gate was secured by Melchia son
                of Rechab, chief of the Bethakcharim ward—by him and his
                sons.      They covered it and set up the doors thereof, and the
           15 gates and the bars thereof. And the gate of the fountain was se-
                 cured by Solomon son of Choleze, a chief of a part of Mas-
                 pha.      He rebuilded and covered it, and set up the doors and the
                 bars thereof, and built the wall of the pool of poppies by the
                 king's garden, continuing it on to the stairs coming down
            16 from the city of David, And after him Nehemias son of Aza-
                 buch, chief of the half of Bethsur ward, continued the fortifi-
                 cations to the garden of David's sepulchre and to the artificial
            17 pool and to Bethaggarim.                     And after him the fortifications were
                 continued by the Levites, by Raum son of Bani, and next to
            18 him by Asabia chief of the half of Keila ward, in his ward
             Ch. IV.                                                              NEHEMIAS.
                      and after him by their brethren, Benei son of Enadacl, chief of
             19 the half of Keila ward                                                and next to him Azur son of Jesus, the
                                                                                  ;
                      chief of Masphai repaired one curtain of the tower of Ascent
             20 which united them at the corner; and after him Barach son
                      of Zabu, repaired the other curtain from the corner to the door
             21 of Betheliasub which belonged to the chief priest ; and after
                      him Meramoth son of Ouria son of Akkos, another piece from
             22 the door of Betheliasub to the termination of that house.                                                                                                         And
                      after him the priests, the men of Ekkechar continued the re-
             23 pairs; After him Benjamin repaired, and Asub over against
                      their house; And after him Azarias son of Maasias son of
             24 Anania, repaired adjoining to his house.                                                                                 After him Bani son
                      of Adad, repaired the next curtain from Bethazaria to the cor-
             25 ner ; but as far as the curve over against the corner, including
                      the tower projecting from the king's house above the court of
                      the guard house, was the work of Phalach son of Euzai ; and
             26 after him was Phadaia son of Phoros, and the Nathanims who
                       dwelt at Ophal, even to the garden of the water gate eastward,
              27 and they bad also the tower which projecteth outwards; and
                      after him the Thekoites had the curtain over against the great
              28 projecting tower and onward to the wall of Ophla.                                                                                                 Above the
                       horse gate the priests repaired every man over against his
              29 house : and after them Sadduk son of Emmer repaired over
                       against his house                                    and after him repaired Samaia, son of Se-
                                                                       ;
                                                                                             eastern gate                          and after him Anania,
              30 chenia, the keeper of the                                                                                     ;
                       son of Selemia, and Anom the sixth son of Seleph had the
                       next curtain                             and after Lim Mesulam, son of Barachia had
                                                          ;
              31 over against his treasury office                                                              and after him Melchia son of
                                                                                                           ;
                       Sarephi had as far as Bethan-nathanim ; and the haberdashers
                       were over against the Maphekad and as far as the ascent of the
              32 curve                     and the brasiers and the haberdashers had between that
                                       ;
                       and the sheep gate.
              IV.                  Now when Sanaballat heard that we were building the
                 2 wall it appeared evil to him and he was much incensed, and
                       railed against the Jews, and said before his brethren, Is the ar-
                       my of Somoron reduced to this, that these Jews are building
                       their city ?                        They are indeed offering sacrifice ; but can they
                 3 prevail ?                      Can they heal the stones after being burned to a heap
                       of dust ?                   Thereupon Tobias the Ammonite came near him and
                                                                                                                                          ;;
                      IV.                                      NEHEMIAS.
             Ch.
                   said to them, Can they either sacrifice or eat in that place of
                   theirs ?        Cannot a fox go up and demolish their stone walls ?
               4 Hear,              our God, how we are made a laughing stock, and turn
               5 their reproach back on their own head, and make them an ob-
                   ject of derision in a land of captivity, and cover not their in-
                   iquity.
               7          But when Sanaballat and Tobias, and the Arabs and the
                   Ammonites, heard that the walls of Jerusalem advanced in
                   height, and that the breaches began to be stopped, it appeared
               8 to them very vexatious, and they all assembled together to come
               9 and attack Jerusalem, and lay it waste. Upon this we prayed
                   to our God, and posted our guards against them clay and night
             10 for fear of them, though Juda said, Were the power of these
                   enemies broken, there is so much rubbish that we cannot re-
             11 build the wall; and they who afflicted us said, They shall not
                   know nor see till we are in the midst of them, and slay them,
             12 and cause the work to cease.                                    And when the Jews who dwelt
             13 near them came and told us, They are coming against us from
                   all quarters, I then posted, for the lowest parts of the place in
                   the fortified posts behind the wall, the spear men and bow men
                   and stationed the people with their swords by communities
             14 and having taken a view, I arose and said to the nobles, and to
                   the officers, and to the rest of the people, Be not afraid of them.
                   Bemember our Gocl who is great and terrible ; and fight for
                   your brethren, your sons, your daughters, your wives and your
             15 houses.              And when our enemies heard that we had got intelli-
                    gence         and God had frustrated their designs, we all returned to
                               ;
             IT) the wall, every man to his work.                                    And from that day one half
                    of them who had been drawn off carried on the work, and the
                    other half was kept ready with spears and shields, and bows
                    and breast plates ; and the chiefs were behind all the house of
             17 Juda who were building the wall.                                      And they who were employ-
                    ed in carrying burdens were armed. With one hand they did
             18 their work, and with the other grasped a javelin.                                                         And the
                    builders had every man his sword girded on his loins while
                    they were building.                     And near every chief was a trumpeter with
             19 a horn.              And I said to the nobles and to the chiefs, and to the
                    rest of the people, The work is extensive and large, and we are
             20 scattered on the wall, one chief far from another.                                               In what place
                               NEHEMIAS.
     Ch. V.
        soever you hear the sound of the trumpet, thither you must
     21 assemble to us, and our God will fight for us.   So while we
        were carrying on the work, one half of them held their spears
     22 from break of day till the stars appeared.  And at that time
        I said to the people, let every man with his youths, lodge in
        Jerusalem, and let the night be devoted to watching and the
     23 day to work.   Now I myself mounted guard, and the men on
        duty attended me, and not a man of us put off our clothes.
     V.     Now there was a great cry of the people and their wives,
      2 against their brethren the Jews.   There were some who said,
        We with our sons and our daughters are many, therefore we
      3 will take corn that we may eat and live.There were others who
        said, As for our fields and our vineyards and our houses, let us
      4 inortgao'e them that we mav get corn and eat.There were others
        who said, We have borrowed money to pay the king's tribute,
      5 and pledged our fields and our vineyards and our houses, and now
        our flesh is the same as that of our brethren, our sons the same as
        theirs, yet behold we are subjecting our sons and our daughters
        to be slaves, nay, some of our daughters are already subjected
        to bondage, and we have no means to redeem them, for our no-
      6 bles have got our fields and our vineyards.Upon hearing their
      7 cry and these speeches, I was exceedingly grieved.  And hav-
        ing consulted in my own mind, I chid the nobles and the
        chiefs, and said to them, Would any man exact of his brother
        what you exact?     Then having assembled a great meeting
      8 against them, I said to them, We with our free will offerings
        have purchased' our brethren the Jews who were sold to the
        nations; and are you going to sell your brethren that they
      9 may be sold to us ? And when they held their peace and found
        no answer, I said, This thing which you do is not good.  It is
        not in this manner that you are in the fear of our God to avoid
     10 the reproach of the nations, our enemies.   My brethren and
        my acquaintances, and I myself, have lent them money and
        provisions. Let us I pray you relinquish our demands for this.
     11 Kestore to them, I beseech you, this very day their fields, and
        their vineyards, and their olive yards, and their houses ;and
        abate the price at which you have sold to each other corn and
     12 wine and oil.   Thereupon they said, We will restore, and re-
         quire nothing ofthem. We will do as thou sayest. Then I called
         the priests and having caused them to swear that they would
                                                                                                                             ;
                   VI.                                  NEHEMIAS.
            Ch.
            13 do according to this decree, I shook my lap and said, So may
                  God shake every man who will not perform this promise, out
                 of his house and from his labour, and let them be shaken out
                  and emptied.             Andall the congregation said, Amen ; and praised
                  the Lord, and the people executed the decree.
            14          From the day I was appointed to be their governor in the
                  land of Juda—from the twentieth to the thirty second year of
                  Arthasastha—for twelve years, I and my brethren did not
            15 eat the daily allowance which was their due—those daily al-
                 lowances with which they who were before me had loaded
                 them, and which they had exacted from them in bread and
                 wine, to the amount at least of forty didrachms of silver.                                           They
                 indeed who had been displaced, tyrannised over the people
           16 but as for me I did not doso; because I feared God.                                                     Even
                 in the work of the wall, I did not domineer over them ; nor
                 did I purchase a field : and all who were employed with me
            17 there in the work, even a hundred and fifty chief men of the
                 Jews, besides those who came to us, from the nations around
            18 us, were at my table.                       And the daily provisions for my table,
                 was one ox, six choice sheep, and a kid for myself; and every
                 ten days wine in plenty for all. Yet for all this I did not demand
                 the daily allowance of bread, because the bondage was heavy
            19 upon the people. Kemember me,                                      my God, for good, for all
                 I have done for this people.
            VI.          Now when Sanaballat and Tobias and Gesam the Arab,
                 and the rest of our enemies heard that I had built the wall, and
                 that there was no opening left therein ; (at that time I had
                 not fixed up the doors in the gates,) Sanaballat and Gesam
              2 sent to me saying, Come let us have a meeting at the villages
             3 in the plain of Ono, intending to do me some mischief.                                                Upon
                 which I sent messengers to them saying, I am engaged in a
                 great work, and cannot go down, lest the work should stop.
             4 Soon as I have completed it, I will go down to you.                                                  Again
                 they sent to me to the same effect, and I returned them the
                 same answer.
             5         Then Sanaballat sent his servant to me with an open letter
             6 in his hand, in which was written, " It is reported among the
                 nations that thou and the Jews intend to rebel ; that for this
                 purpose thou art rebuilding the wall ; and that thou art to be
             7 their king :             and besides this that thou hast set up prophets
     Ch. YU.                   NEHEMIAS.
        for thyself that thou mayst make thyself king in Jerusalem
         over Juda.  Now these reports will be told to the king, now
      8 therefore come and let us consult together."  In reply to which
         I sent to him saying, There is no foundation for the reports
         as thou mentionest them, for thou thyself feignest them out
         of thine own heart.
      9     Because all were trying to terrify us saying, Their hands
        must be weakened from this work, so that it may not be accom-
         plished, therefore on this occasion I strengthened my hands.
     10 So when I went to the house of Semei, son of Dalaia, son of
     11 Metabaal, he became enrapt and said, "Let us repair to the
         house of God—into the midst thereof and
                                                 —      shut the doors
     12 thereof—for they are coming by night to kill us."    But I said,
        What sort of a man must he be who would go into the house
         of God to save his life ! And upon inquiry I found that God
         had not sent him, and that his prophecy was a contrivance
     13 against me ; and that Tobias and Sanaballat had hired a mul-
         titude against me, that I might be frightened, and act in this
         manner, and take a wrong step, and fall into disrepute, that
     14 they might reproach me.       Remember,       God, Tobias and
         Sanaballat, according to these doings of theirs ;    and Noa-
         dias the prophet, and the rest of the prophets, who tried to
         terrify me.
     15     Now the wall was finished on. the five and twentieth day
     16 of the month Elul, in fifty two days.   And when all our ene-
         mies heard ; all the nations around us were terrified, and great
        fear fell upon them ; for they saw plainly that the perfecting
     17 of this work was of our God.    In those days many of the no-
         bles of Juda sent letters to Tobias, and received letters from
     18 him.   For many in Juda were affined to him, for he was the
         son in law of Sechenias, son of Erae, and his son Jonan had
         married a daughter of Mesulam, son of Barachias, and they
     19 kept on, telling me what he said and conveying to him what
        I said.  And Tobias sent letters to frighten me.
     VII.     Now when the wall was built, and I had set up the doors,
       2 and the keepers were reviewed and the musicians and the Le-
         vites, I gave a charge to my brother Ananias, and to Ananias
         chief of Bira in Jerusalem ; for he was a man of truth, and
       3 feared God above many ; and I said to them, The gates of
                                              ;  ;                                                      ;                           ;     ;   ;    ; ;; ;; ;; ;  ;
               Ch. VII.                                                  NEHEMIAS.
                       Jerusalem must not be opened till sunrise.                                                                  And when the
                       watch is set, let the doors be shut and well bolted, and appoint
                       guards of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, every man in his ward,
                  4 and every man over against his house.                                                       As the city was of large
                       extent, and the people therein few, and the houses were not re-
                  5 built, God put it into my heart, and I had collected the nobles
                       and the chiefs, and the people into classes, having found a
                       book of the enrollment of those who first came up, in which I
                  6 found written : " Now these are the children of the province
                       who came up from the captivity—from the distant abode to
                       which Nabuchodonosar the king of Babylon had sent them,
                  7 and who returned, every man to his city, with Zorobabel and
                       Jesus, and Nehemias, Azarias and Keelma, Naemani, Morde-
                       cai, Balsan, Maspharath, Esdra, Baguia, Inaum, Baana, Mas-
                       phar, head men ofthe people of Israel.
                  8            The children of Pharos, two thousand a hundred and se-
                       venty two
                  9            The children of Saphatia, three hundred and seventy two
               10              The children of Era, six hundred and fifty two ;
               11              The children of Phaath-moab, descendants of Jesu and
                       Joab, two thousand six hundred and eighteen ;
               12              The children of Ailam, a thousand two hundred and fifty
                       four;
                13             The children of Zathuia, eight hundred and forty five
                14             The children of Zakchu, seven hundred and sixty
                15             The children of Banui, six hundred and forty eight;
                16             The children of Bebi, six hundred and twenty eight
                17             The children of Esgad, two thousand three hundred and
                       twenty two
                18             The children of Adonikam, six hundred and sixty seven
                19             The children of Bagoi, two thousand and sixty seven
               20              The children of Edin, six hundred and fifty five
               21              The children of Ater, descendants of Ezekias, ninety eight
               22              The children of Esam, three hundred and twenty eight
               23              The children of Besei, three hundred and twenty four
               24              The children of Ariph, a hundred and twelve
                               The children of Asen, two hundred and twenty three ;
               25              The children of Gabaon, ninety five ;
               26              The children of Baithalem, a hundred and twenty three
                               The children of Atopha, fifty six
                               ;;         :                  ;                                                                 ;;;          ;
                   VII.                                         NEHEMIAS.
          Ch.
          27             The children of Anathoth, a hundred and twenty eight
          28             The men of Bethasmoth, forty two ;
          29             The men of Kariathiarim, Kaphira and Beroth, seven hun-
                 dred and forty three
          30             The men of Arama and Gabaa, six hundred and twenty ;
          31             The men of Machemas, a hundred and twenty two ;
          32             The men of Baithel and Ai, a hundred and twenty three ;
          33             The men of Nabia, a hundred aud fifty two.
          34             The men of Elamaar, a thousand two hundred and fifty
                  two ;
          35             The children of Eram, three hundred and twenty
          36             The children of Jericho, three hundred and forty five ;
          37             The children of Lodadid and Ono, seven hundred and
                  twentv one
          38             The children of Sanana, three thousand nine hundred and
                  thirty
           39            The Priests.                  The children of Jodae, for the house of Je-
                  sus, nine hundred and seventy three ;
          40             The children of Emmer, a thousand and fifty two
           41            The children of Phaseur, a thousand two hundred and forty
                  seven
          42             The children of Eram, a thousand and seventeen
           43             The Levites.                    The children of Jesus and Kadmiel, de-
                  scendants of Ouduia, seventy four.
           44            The musicians, the children of Asaph, a hundred and
                  eighty eight.
           45            The keepers of the gates, the Salumites, the Aterites, the
                  Telmonites, the Akubites, the Atites, the Sabites, a hundred
                  and thirty eight.
           46            The Nathinims, The Seas', the Asphas', the Tabaoths',
                  the Kiras', the Asuias', the Phadons', the Labana's, the Aga-
                  bas', the Selnieis', the Anans', the Gadels', the Gaars', the
           50 Kaaias', the Kassons', the Nekodas', the Gersams', the Ozis',
                  the Pheses', the Besis', the                                      Meinons', the Nephosasis', the
                  Bakbuks', the Achiphas', the Aroers', the Basaloths', the Mi-
                  das', the Adasons', the Barkoues', the Sisaraths', the Themas',
           i>5 the Msias', the Atiphas'.                                    The children of Solomon's servants,
                  the Suteis', the Sapharats', the Pheridas', the Jelels', the Dor-
                   kons', the Gadaels', the Saphatias', the Ettels', the Phakaraths',
                          VOL. II.                                                  M
        Ch. VIII.                   NEHEMIAS.
            the Sabaims', the Einims', all these Nathiniins and the child-
            ren  of Solomon's servants, three hundred and ninety two.
        61 These also came up from Thelmeleth, Thelaresa, Charub,
            Eron, Jerner, but could not shew the houses of their families,
        62 nor their seed, whether they are of Israel, namely, the child-
            ren of Dalaia, the children of Tobia, the        children of Ne-
        63 koda, six hundred and forty two.          And of the priests: the
            children of Ebia, the children of Akos, the children of Ber-
            zelli,(for  they had married some of the daughters of Ber-
        64 zelli, the Galaadite, and were called by their names)—these
            sought the register of their genealogy, but it could not be found.
        65 Though they were related to the priesthood, yet the Athersas-
            tha ordered, that they should not eat of the most holy meats,
        66 until a priest should arise with the Manifestation.      The whole
            congregation was about forty two thousand three hundred and
            sixty, exclusive of their men servants and maid servants, the
            number of whom was seven thousand three hundred and thirty
            seven, and the choristers of both sexes, two hundred and forty
            five.  Their asses were two thousand seven hundred.
         70     As some of the heads of the families had given for the
            work—to Nehemias, for the treasury, a thousand pieces of
         71 gold, fifty cups, and thirty vestures for the priests ; the other
            heads of the families gave for the treasures of the work, twen-
            ty thousand pieces of gold, and two thousand three hundred
         72 mnas of silver ; and the rest of the people gave twenty thou-
            sand pieces of gold, and two thousand two hundred mnas
         73 of silver, and sixty seven vestures for the priests.     Now the
            priests and the Levites, and the keepers of the gates and the
            musicians, and some of the people, and the Nathiniins, and all
         VIII.     Israel, had taken up their abode in their cities; but
            when the seventh month was come, the sons of Israel who
            were in their cities, and all the people, assembled like one man,
            in the street which is before the water gate, and spoke to Es-
            dras the scribe to bring out the book of the law of Moses,
          2 which the Lord had enjoined on Israel.       So Esdras the priest,
            brought out the law before the congregation, consisting of men
            and women, even all who had understanding, to hear it, on the
            first day of the seventh month, and read therein from sun ris-
          3 ing to mid day, before the men and the women, even all who
       1
     Ch. VIII.                        NEHEMIAS.
         were capable of understanding.            And the ears of all the people
         were attentive to the book of the law.
       4      Now Esdras the scribe stood on a wooden scaffold, and
         there stood near him Matthathias and Samaias and Ananias
         and Ourias and Chelkia and Maasia on his right; and on his
         left, Phadaias and Misael and Melchias and Asoin and Asa-
       5 badrna, and Zacharias and Mesollom.                And Esdras opened the
         book in the presence of all the people, for he was above them.
       6 And when he opened it all the prophets stood up.                  Then Esdras
         blessed the Lord the great God.             And all the people answered
          and said, Amen, with uplifted hands.              Then they bowed down
       7 and worshipped the Lord with their faces to the ground.                     And
          Jesus and Banaias and Sarabias proceeded to instruct the peo-
       S pie in the law, and the people kept their station.                  And when
          they had read in the book of the law of God, Esdras taught
          and enforced it with a knowledge of the Lord, so that the peo-
       9 pie gained understanding by the reading.                  Then spake Nehe-
          mias—when Esdras the priest and scribe and the Levites and
          they who instructed the people, had said to all the people, This
          day is holy to the Lord our God, mourn not nor weep (for all
          the people wept when they heard the words of the law) then he
      10 said to them, Go, eat dainty meats, and drink sweet wine and
          send portions to them who have none, for this day is holy to
          the Lord ; and do not Respond ; for the Lord is our strength.
      1   And the Levites stilled all the people, saying, Hold your peace
      12 for this is a holy day and do not despond. So all the people went
          away to eat and drink, and send portions and make great joy,
          because they had gained knowledge by the words which were
          explained to them.
      13       And on the second day, when the heads of the families
          with all the people and the priests and the Levites, were as-
          sembled before Esdras the scribe, to attend to all the words of
      14 the law, they found it written in the law which the Lord had
           given in charge to Moses, That the Israelites should dwell in
      15 booths at the festival in the seventh month, and that they should
           sound trumpets in all their cities and in Jerusalem.                   Where-
          upon Esdras said, Go out to the mountains and bring in olive
           branches, and branches of cypress trees and myrtle branches
           and palm branches, and the branches of every bushy tree to
           IX.
       Oh.                      NEHEMIAS.
       16 make booths according to what is written.Accordingly the peo-
          ple went out and brought them, and made for themselves
          booths, every man on his house top, and in their court yards,
          and in the courts of the house of God, and in the streets of the
       17 city, even to the gate of Ephraim.And when all the congrega-
          tion—all who had returned from captivity, had made them-
          selves booths and sat therein, because the Israelites had not
          done so from the days of Joshua son of Nave even to that day,
       18 the joy was great. So he read in the book of the law of God,
          day by day, from the first day to the last.And when they had
          kept the festival for seven days, on the eighth day they kept the
          exod according to custom.
       IX.     And on the twenty fourth day of the same month, the
          children of Israel were assembled, fasting, and in sackcloth,
          and with earth on their heads, and having separated themselves
          from every stranger, they stood and confessed their sins and
        3 the iniquities of their fathers.When they had stood in their
          place and had the book of the law of the Lord their God read
          to them, and had made confession to the Lord and worshipped
        4 the Lord their God ; then Jesus stood on the step of the Le-
          vites with the sons of Kadmiel, Sechenia son of Sarabia, the
          sons of Choneni : and when they had cried with a loud voice
        5 to the Lord their God, and the Levites, Jesus and Kadmiel said,
          Arise, bless ye the Lord our God; from everlasting to ever-
          lasting let them bless thy glorious name, and exalt it with all
          blessing and praise, then Esdras said, "Thou art thyself the
        6 only Lord.  Thou hast made the heaven and the heaven of
          heaven with all their host, the earth and all the things therein,
          the seas and all which are in them ; and thou quickenest them
        7 all ; and the armies of heaven worship thee.Thou art the Lord
          God.   Having made choice of Abrarn, thou didst lead him
          out from the country of the Chaldees and give him the name
        8 of Abraham. And finding his heart faithful before thee, thou
          madest a covenant with him, to give him the land of the
          Chananites and the Chettites and the Amorites and the Phere-
          zites and the Jebusites and the Gergasites, even to his seed,
          and hast performed thy words, for thou art righteous.
        9    "Thou didst see the affliction of our fathers in Egypt and
       10 didst hear their cry at the Ked sea : and having shewn signs
                                                                              -;
      Ch. IX.                      NEHEMIAS.
          and wonders in Egypt on Pharao and on all his servants and
          on all his people, because thou knewest that they had behaved
          proudly against them, and made thyself a name as at this day,
      11 thou didst cleave the sea before them, and they passed through
          the midst of the sea on dry ground, but those who were pur-
          suing thou didst cast into the deep like a stone in boisterous
      12 water.   With a pillar of cloud thou didst guide them by day
          and by night with a pillar of fire, to illumine the way for them
      13 in which they should go : thou earnest down also on mount
          Sina and didst speak to them from heaven, and give them right
          judgments and laws of truth and statutes and good command
      14 ments.     Thou madest known to them thy holy sabbaths and
          didst prescribe for them commandments and statutes and a law
          by the ministry of thy servant Moses.
      15      "Thou gavest them also bread from heaven for their food,
          and didst bring water for them out of a rock for their thirst, or-
          dering them to go in and take possession of the land which thou
      16 hadst stretched forth thy hand to give them. But they, even our
          fathers, behaved proudly and hardened their neck, and hearken-
          ed not to thy commandments.
      17      "Though they refused to go in, and were unmindful of
          thy wonders which thou hadst done among them—though
          they hardened their neck, and set up a head to return to their
          bondage in Egypt, yet thou who art a God merciful and gra-
          cious, long suffering and of great kindness, didst not forsake
      18 them utterly.     Even before this, though they made themselves
          a molten calf and said, These are the gods which brought us
      19 up out of Egypt, and committed great provocations ; yet thou
          through thy manifold mercies didst not leave them in the wil-
          derness.   Thou didst not withdraw from them by day the pillar
          of a cloud which was to guide them in the way, nor the pillar
          of fire, at night, which was to illumine the way for them in
      20 which they should go ; but gavest thy good spirit to instruct
          them; and not withholding thy manna from their mouth, thou
      21 gavest them water when they were athirst.           Thus didst thou
          sustain them forty years in the wilderness, not suffering them
          to want any thing.      Their clothes did not wear out, nor were
      22 their feet galled.    Then thou gavest them kingdoms, and didst
          divide peoples among them; so they took possession of the
                                                                    —:
      Ch. IX.                  NEHEMIAS.
         land of Seon king of Esebon, and of the land of Og king of
      23 Basan.   And having multiplied their children as the stars of
         heaven, thou broughtest them into the land which thou hadst
      24 promised their fathers ; and they took possession of it.  But
         when thou hadst subdued before them the inhabitants of the
         land of the Chananites, and delivered them into their hands
         both the kings and the people of the land, to do with them as
      25 they thought fit ; and they had taken lofty cities, and got pos-
         session of houses filled with all good things, of cisterns ready
         hewn out of stone, of vineyards and oliveyards, and all sorts of
         fruit trees in abundance, and had eaten and were filled, and be-
      20 came fat, they rioted on thy great bounty, and turned and
         apostatised from thee, and cast thy law behind their backs
         Nay, they slew thy prophets who testified against them to turn
      27 them to thee; and committed great provocations.     Therefore
         thou didst deliver them into the hand of their enemies, who
         afflicted them.But when, in the time of their distress they cried
         to thee, thou from heaven didst hear, and in thy tender mercies
         which are great, thou didst send them deliverers, and save
      28 them out of the hand of them who were afflicting them. Yet
         soon as they had rest, they returned to do evil in thy sight,
         therefore thou didst leave them in the hand of their enemies,
      29 who exercised dominion over them.  But again when they cried
         to thee, thou from heaven didst hearken, and in the multitude
         of thy tender mercies didst deliver them, and admonish them
         to return to thy law.  When they hearkened not, but trans-
         gressed thy commandments and thy judgments, (which if a
      30 man practise he shall live thereby) and turned back rebelliously,
         and hardened their neck, and would not hear, and thou hadst
         borne with them many years, and testified against them by thy
         Spirit—by the ministry of thy prophets ; and they did not give
      31 ear, though thou didst deliver them into the hands of the peo-
         ple of the land, yet in the multitude of thy tender mercies thou
         didst not give them up to utter destruction, nor quite forsake
         them.
      32     " Seeing thou art mighty and merciful, and tenderly com-
         passionate; now therefore,   our God, the Mighty, the Great,
         the Powerful and the Awful, who keepest thy covenant and thy
         mercy, let not all the trouble be accounted light in thy sight,
                 —
           X.                      NEHEMIAS.
      Oh.
          which hath come upon us, and our kings, and our chiefs, and
          our priests, and our prophets, and our fathers, and on all thy
          people from the days of the kings of Assur even to this day.
      33 Thou indeed art righteous in all that have come upon us.         For
      34 thou hast acted with truth ; but we have sinned greatly.         Our
          kings, and our chiefs, and our priests, and our fathers, have
          not kept thy law, nor hearkened to thy commandments and
      35 thy testimonies which thou hast testified against them. Even in
          thine own kingdom, and during that abundant bounty of thine
          which thou didst bestow on them, and in this extensive and rich
          country which thou gavest before them, they have not served
      36 thee, nor turned away from their wicked devices.          Behold we
          are now slaves, and as for this land which thou gavest to our
      37 fathers to eat the fruits thereof, and the good things thereof,
          behold we are slaves in it; and its abundant fruits belong to
          those kings whom for our sins thou hast set over us, and who
          have dominion over our bodies, and who can do with our cat-
      38 tie what they please, so that we are in great affliction.   In a due
          sense, therefore, of all these things we pledge our faith, we by
          writing, and our chiefs, our Levites, and our priests by seal-
      X.      ing   (note they who sealed were Nehernias the Artasastha, son
          of Aehelia, and Sedckias son of Araia, and Azaria and Jercmia,
          Phasur, Amaria, Mclchia, Attics, Sebani, Malueh, Tram, Me-
          rarnoth, Abelia, Daniel, Gannathon, Baruch, Mosulam, Abia, Mi-
        9 amin, Maasia, Belgai, Samaia : And these priests and Levites,
          Jesus son of Azania, Banaiu, of the sons of Enadad, Kadmicl and
          his  brethren,  Sabania, Oduia, Kalitan, Phelia, Anan, Micha,
          lioliob, Asebias, Zakchur, Sarabia, Sebania, Odnm, sons of Ba-
          nuai; the chiefs of the people, Phoros, Phaath-moab, Elam, Zat-
          thuia, sons of Bani, Asgad, Bebai, Adania, Barjoi, Edin, Ater,
          Ezelda,  Azur,   Oduia,  Esam, Besi,     Ariph, Anathoth,     Nobai,
          Megaphes,   Mesullam, Ezir, Mesozebel, Saduk, Jeddua,         Phal-
          tia, Anan, Anaia, Osee, Anania, Asub, Aloes, Phctiai, Sobek,
          Reum, Essabana, Maasia and Aia, Ainan, Eram, Maluch, Eram,
          Baana: and the rest of the people, the priests, the Levites, the
          keepers of the gates, the musicians, the Nathinims, and every one
          who came from among the people of the land to the law of God,
          their wives, their sons, their daughters, every one who had know-
          ledge and understanding, ivere urgent with their brethren, and
                                                                                                                              ::
                   X.                                    NEHEMIAS.
            Oh.
                 bound themselves with an oath, entering into a curse and an oath—)
            29 that we will walk in the law of God, which was given by the
                 ministry of Moses the servant of God, to keep and to do all the
                 commandments of the Lord and his judgments and his sta-
            30 tutes; and that we will not give our daughters to the people
                 of the land; nor will we take their daughters for our sons,
            31 and that with regard to the people of the country who bring
                 wares or any thing to sell on the sabbath day, we will not buy
            32 of them on the sabbath, or ou a holy day : and that every se-
                 venth year we will remit every demand of what kind soever
                 and that we will confirm the commands upon us to give every
                 year a third of a didrachm for the service of the house of our
            33 God, for the presence loaves and the sacrifice of the daily ob-
                  lation and for the whole burnt offering of every day, of the
                  sabbaths, of the new moons, for the festivals and for the holy
                  things, namely, the sin offerings to make atonement for Israel,
            34 and for the works of the house of our God : and that we the
                  priests and the Levites and the people who have cast lots touch-
                  ing the bringing of wood, will bring it for the house of our
                  God, for the house of our families, at the set times and seasons
                  yearly, to be burned on the altar of the Lord our God, as it is
            35 written in the law : and that we will bring the first fruits of our
                  land, and the first fruits of every fruit tree yearly to the house
            36 of the Lord, and do, with regard to the first born of our sons
                  and our cattle, as it is written in the law ; that we will bring
                  the firstlings of our herds and our flocks to the house of our
                  God for the priests, who minister in the house of our God
            37 and that we will bring the dedications of our corn including
                  the fruit of trees, and of wine and oil to the stores of the
                  house of God for the priests; and the tythe of our land for
                  the Levites. But the Levites themselves shall receive the tythes
            38 in all the cities of our bondage; and the priest, the son of
                  Aaron, shall share with the Levite in the Levite's tythe; and
                  the Levites shall carry the tythe of their tythe to the house of
            39 our God—to the store houses for the house of our God—be-
                  cause the children of Israel including the children of Levi are
                  to carry the dedications of their corn, their wine and their oil
                  to these treasuries, and the holy vessels and the priests and the
                  ministering servants and the keepers of the gates and the mu-
        Ch. XI.                                       NEHEMIAS.
              sicians are to be there, therefore we will not forsake the house
              of our God."
        XI.           Now the chiefs of the people dwelt at Jerusalem, and the
              rest of the people cast lots to bring one of every ten to dwell
          2 in Jerusalem, the holy city, and nine parts in their cities.                                             And
              the people blessed all those men who were of their own accord
          3 willing to dwell in Jerusalem.                               Now these are chiefs of the
              country who dwelt in Jerusalem and the cities of Juda.                                              There
              dwelt every man in his possession in their cities, Israel, the
              priest and the Levites and the Nathinims and the children of
          4 Solomon's servants : and there dwelt in Jerusalem some of the
              sons of Juda and some of the sons of Benjamin—of the sons
               of Juda, Athaia, son Azia, son Zacharia, son Samaria, son
           5 Saphatia, son JMaleleel ; and of the sons of Phares also, Maasia,
               son Baruch, son Chalaza, son Ozia, son Adaia, son Joarib,
           6 the son of Zacharias, the son of the Selonite—all these sons
               of Phares who dwelt in Jerusalem were four hundred and
           7 sixty eight men of array.                         And these were the sons of Benja-
               min, Selo, son Mesulom, son Joad, son Phadaia, son Choleia,
           8 son Maasias, son Ethiel, son Jesia, and after him, Gebe, Sele,
           9 nine hundred and twenty eight, and Joel son of Zechri was
               overseer over them, and Juda son of Asana for the city was
         10 second.            Of the priests, Jadia son of Joarid, Jachin, Saraia, son
               Alchia, son jMesulam, son Sadduk, son Marioth, son Aitoth
         11 were over against the house of God, and their brethren who
         12 did the work of the house were eight hundred and twenty two
                                                                                                                            ;
               and Adaia a son of Jeroam who was the son of Phalatia son of
          13 Amasi, son Zacharias, son Phasur, son Melchia and his bre-
               thren, heads of families, two hundred and forty two ; and
               Amasia son of Esdriel who was the son of Mesarimith, son of
          14 Emmer and his brethren fit to be mustered, a hundred and
                twenty eight, and their overseer was Badiel one of the nobles.
          15 xVnd of the Levites, Samaia son of Esrikam, Matthanias son of
          16 Micha and Jobed, son of Samue, two hundred and eighty
          19 four.         And the keeper of the gates, Akub, Telamin and their
          22 brethren, a hundred and seventy two.                                        And the overseer of
                the Levites son Bani, son Ozi, son Asabia, son Micha of the
                sons of Asaph the musicians attended over against the work
                of the house of God, for it was the king's command to them.
                      VOL. II.                                    x
                                                                                                                   ;;
                 XII.                                NEHEMIAS.
          Ch.
          24 And Phatkaia son of Baseza was the king's minister for all
          25 matters with the people.                      And for their villages in the fields
                some of the sons of Juda dwelt at Kariatharbok and at Jesou
          30 and at Bersabee.                And their villages were Lachis and its fields,
                and they encamped at Bersabee.                           And the sons of Benjamin
          36 were from Gabaa to Mackmas, and of the Levites, some were
                with Juda and some with Benjamin.
          XII.           Now these are the priests and the Levites who came up
                with Zorobabel son of Salathiel and Jesus, Saraia, Jeremia,
            7 Esdra, Amaria, Maluch, Sechenia, these were the chiefs of the
               priests ; and their brethren in the days of Jesus, namely the
                Levites, were Jesu, Banui, Kadmiel, Sarabaia, Jodae, Mattha-
                nia.     He was superintendant, and their brethren were for the
               courses.        And Jesus begot Joakim and Joakim begot Eliasib
               and Eliasib begot Jodae, and Jodae begot Jonathan, and Jona-
               than begot Jadu.              And in the days of Joakim his brethren the
               priests, the chiefs of the families were for Saraia, Amaria ; for
               Jeremia, Anania ;              for Esdra, Mesulam ; for Amaria, Joanan
               for Amaluch, Jonathan ; for Sechenia, Joseph ; for Are, Man-
               nas ;      for    Marioth,        Elkai ;       for    Adadai, Zacharia ;               for    Ga-
               nathoth, Mesolam ; for Abia, Zechri ; for Miamin, Maadai
               for Pheleti ; for Balgas, Samue ; for Semia, Jonathan ; for Joa-
                rib, Matthanai ; for Edio, Ozi ; for Salai, Kallai ; for Amek,
          22 Abed ; for Elkia, Asabias ; for Jediu, Nathaniel.                                    And in the
               days of Eliasib, these Levites, Joada and Joa, and Joanan and
               Idua were enrolled chiefs of the families, and they were the
          23 priests in the reign of Darius the Persian.                                 Now the Levites
                enrolled as heads of the families in the book of Chronicles,
          24 continued till the days of Joanan son of Elisue.                                       And these
                were the chiefs of the Levites, Asabia and Sarabia and Jesu,
                and the sons of Kadmiel and their brethren, were over against
                them for the hymn, to sing praises according to the command
                of David the man of God course for course.
          25         When I had collected the keepers of the gates in the days of
                Joakim, son of Jesus, son of Josedek, even in the days of Nehe-
                mias, when Esdras was the priest and scribe, at the dedication of
                the wall of Jerusalem, they sought the Levites in all their places
                to bring them to Jerusalem, to make the dedication with joyful
           28 thanksgivings and with songs, accompanied with cymbals and
           Ch. XII.                                                 NEHEMIAS.
                   psalteries and kinyras ; and the sons of the musicians were as-
                   sembled at Jerusalem from the neighbourhood around, both
           29 from the villages and the fields.                                            For the musicians at Jerusa-
           30 lem had built villages for themselves.                                                   And the priests and the
                   Levites having purified themselves, purified also the people,
           31 and the keepers of the gates and the wall.                                                          Then they brought
                  up the chiefs of Juda upon the wall, and having appointed two
                   great companies for the songs of praise, they proceeded on
           32 from the right upon the wall of the dung gate                                                                          and after
                                                                                                                                 ;
           33 them went Osaia and half of the chiefs of Juda, namely, Aza-
                  rias       and Esdras, and ITesolani and Juda, and Benjamin and
           34 Samaias, and Jeremia and some of the sons of the priests, with
           35 trumpets, Zacharias, son Jonathan, son Samaia, son Mattha-
           36 nia, son Michaia, son Zakchur, son Asaph and his brethren,
                  Samaia and Oziel, Gelol, Jama, Aia, Nathaniel and Juda,
                  Anani, to sing praises in the songs of David, the man of God.
           37             And Esdras the scribe was before those at the gate, to sing
                  praises over against these.                                And they went up the stairs of the
                  city of David, by the ascent of the wall above the house of
                  David, and on to the water gate of Ephraim, and over the
                  fish gate, and by the tower of Anameel, and on to the sheep
           42 gate.              And the musicians were heard though they were hid
           43 from view.                    And on that day they offered great sacrifices, and
                  rejoiced.              Because God had given them great joy, therefore
                  their wives and their children rejoiced, and the joy of Jerusalem
                  was heard at a great distance.
           44            And on that day they appointed chief men over the store
                  houses for the treasures, the dedications, and the tythes, and
                   what were collected therein for the chiefs of the cities, and as-
                  signed portions for the priests and the Levites.                                                          For Juda re-
                 joiced at the attendance of the priests and the Levites, as they
                  kept the watches of their God and the watches of purification ;
          45 and at the attendance of the musicians and the keepers of the
                  gates, as they were instituted by the command of David and his
          46 son Solomon.                         Because in the days of David at the institution,
                  Asaph was the first of them who sung hymns and praises to
          47 God, therefore in the days of Zorobabel and in the days of Xe-
                  hemias, all Israel continued the giving daily portions to the
                  musicians and to the keepers of the gates, dedicating them to
      Ch. XIII.               NEHEMIAS.
         the Levites, and the Levites dedicating them to the sons of
         Aaron.
      XIII.    On reading that day in the book of Moses in the audi-
         ence of the people, it was found written therein, that the Am-
         monites and the Moabites should not enter into the congrega-
         tion of God forever ; because they did not meet the Israelites
         with bread and water ; but hired Balaam against them to curse
       3 them; but our God turned the curse into a blessing.  And
         when they heard the law, they separated from Israel all the
       4 mixed multitude.  Now before this, Eliasib the priest, made
         his dwelling in a store house of the house of our God.Having
       5 an affinity with Tobias, he had fitted up for himself a large
         store house in which they formerly stored up the sacrifice and
         the frankincense, and the vessels, and the tythe of the corn,
         and the wine and the oil, the allotment of the Levites and the
         musicians, and the keepers of the gates, and the oblations
       6 which belonged to the priest.But during all that time I was
         not at Jerusalem.For in the thirty second year of Arthasastha
       7 king of Babylon, I went to the king. And at the end of the
         year, having obtained the king's leave, I came to Jerusalem.
         When I was informed of the wickedness which Eliasib had
         committed for the sake of Tobias, in fitting up for him a trea-
       8 sure house in the court of the house of God, it grieved me ex-
          ceedingly ; therefore I threw all the furniture of Tobias out of
        9 the treasure house.And when by my orders they had purified
          the rooms, I caused to be brought there again the utensils of
       10 the house of God, and the sacrifice and the incense.And when
          I understood that the portions of the Levites had not been giv-
          en them ; and that the Levites and the musicians who were
          employed in the service had fled, every man to his field,
       11 I quarrelled with the officers and said, Why is the house of
       12 God forsaken ? Then I brought them together and set them
          in their station ; and all Juda brought in the tythe of the corn,
          and the wine, and the oil into the treasuries, under the charge
          of Selemia the priest, and Sadok the scribe, and Phadaia, one
       13 of the Levites, who had for assistants Anan, son Zakchur, son
          Mathanias, because they were accounted faithful.And it was
          their business to make distribution among their brethren.
     Ch. XIII.               NEHEMIAS.
     14 Kemember me,     God, for this; and let not the observance I
        have paid to the house of the Lord God be blotted out.
     15    In those days I saw in Juda some treading wine presses on
        the sabbath day, and some carrying sheaves, and loading their
        asses with wine and grapes and figs, and all kinds of burdens,
        and bringing them to Jerusalem on the sabbath day.Where-
        upon I testified against them, touching the day of their selling.
     16 Some also dwelt there who brought fish, and sold all sorts of
        wares on the sabbath, to the children of Juda, even in Jerusa-
     17 lem.  Upon this I chid the freemen of Juda, and said to them,
     18 What evil is this which you do in profaning the sabbath ?Did
        not your fathers do so, and did not our God bring upon them
        and upon us, and upon this city, all these evils ?And are you
        bringing more wrath upon Israel by profaning the sabbath?
     19 And when the gates of Jerusalem were set up, I ordered them
        to be shut before the sabbath, and gave a charge that they
        should not be opened till after the sabbath ; and I stationed
        some of my servants at the gates that no burdens might be
     20 brought in on the sabbath day.Upon this they all lodged and
        carried on their traffick without Jerusalem once or twice.
     21 Then I testified against them and. said to them, Why do you
        lodge before the walls ?If you do so any more I will lay hands
     22 on you.  From that time they did not come on the sabbath.
        Then I ordered the Levites who were sanctified and come to
        guard the gates, to keep holy the sabbath day.For these things
        remember me,    my God, and have compassion on me accord-
        ing to thy abundant mercy.
     2o     In those days also I saw the Jews who had married wives
     24 of Azotus, of Ammon, and of Moab, and their children spoke
     25 half in the dialect of Azotus, and did not know how to speak
         the Jewish language ; and I .quarrelled with them, and re-
         proached them, and smote some men among them, and caus-
         ed some of them to be shaved, and adjured them by God, say-
         ing, You shall not give your daughters to their sons, nor take
      26 any of their daughters ibr your sons.Did not Solomon king
         of Israel sin by doing so ?Though among many nations there
         was not a king like him?  Though he was beloved by God,
         and God had made him king over all Israel, yet strange women
      27 led him astray.Let us not therefore hear of your committing
                                                                                                                  ;
                XIII.                               NEHEMIAS.
         Ck.
               all this iniquity, breaking covenant with our God, and marry-
         28 ing strange women.                  And one of the sons of Joada the son of
               Elisub the high priest, being the son in law of Sanaballat the
               Ouranite, I drove him from me.
         29         Put them in mind,                     God, of their near relation to the
         30 priesthood, and of the covenant of the priesthood.                                     As for the
               Levites I purified them from all connexion with strangers,
               and appointed the courses of the priests and the Levites, every
               man according to his business, and the offering of the wood
               carriers at stated periods, and at the festivals.
                    Remember me                God, for good.
                                                      ESTHER.
         I.           After these things, in the days of Artaxerxes the same
           2 who reigned from India, over a hundred and twenty seven
               provinces, when Artaxerxes was settled on his throne in the
           3 city Susoi, in the third year of his reign, he made an entertain-
               ment for his friends, both for other nations, and for the nobles
           4 of the Persians and Medes, and for the governors.                                  And having
               after this displayed to them the riches of his kingdom, and the
               transporting glory of his riches, for a hundred and eighty days,
           5 when the days of his marriage were fulfilled, the king made
               an entertainment for all the nations who were in the city, for
           6 six days, in the court of the royal palace, which was adorned
               with painted hangings of cotton, extended with cords of cot-
               ton, and purple yarn, to capitals of gold and silver, on pillars
               of parian marble and alabaster.                     The couches were of gold and
               silver, on a pavement of smaragdine, pinine, and parian stone
               and their covers were of gause, painted with a variety of flow-
           7 ers ; and roses were scattered all around.                             The goblets of gold
               and silver, with a small carbuncled cup to each, amounted in
               value to thirty thousand talents.                     There was wine in abundance
           8 and of a sweet quality, such as the king himself drank.                                        Now
               this entertainment was not according to an established cus-
               tom ; but the king would have it so, and he commanded the
               stewards to comply with his pleasure, and that of the guests.
           9 Astin the queen also made an entertainment for the women
         10 in the royal palace, where king Artaxerxes was.                                     And on the
     Ch. II.                       ESTHER.
         seventh day, the king, in high good humour, ordered Anian and
         Basan and Tharra and Barazi and Zatholtha and Abataza and
         Tharaba, the seven chamberlains, who waited on king Artax-
     11 erxes, to bring the queen to him to proclaim her queen, and
         crown her with a diadem, and shew her to the chiefs, and her
     12 beauty to the nations ; for she was beautiful.   But queen Astin
         hearkened not to him to come with the chamberlain, at which
     13 the king was greatly offended and inflamed with anger and
         he said to his friends, Astin hath spoken so and so ; do you
         therefore execute law and judgment, touching this matter.
     14 Thereupon there came before him, Arkesaius and Sarsathaius
         and Malisear the chiefs of the Persians and Medes, who were
     15 near the king, and had the first seats next him ; and told him
         according to the laws what ought to be done to queen Astin,
         because she had not done what the king had commanded by
     16 the chamberlains.    And Muchaius said to the king and to the
         chiefs, Queen Astin hath wronged, not the king only, but also
     17 all the king's chiefs and leaders ; for he hath told them the
         queen's conduct and how she hath contradicted the king.
     18 Therefore as she hath contradicted the king Artaxerxes, so
         will the rest of the ladies now, the wives of the Persian and
         Medean princes, upon hearing what she hath said to the king,
     19 presume in like manner to dishonour their husbands.      If there-
         fore it seemeth good to the king, let him pass a royal decree
         and let it be written according to the laws of the Medes and
     20 Persians, and let him not alter it nor suffer the queen any
         more to approach him; but let the king give her royalty to
         another woman, better than her.      And let this edict of the
         king be proclaimed, which if he cause to be done throughout
         his kingdom, then will all the women both rich and poor, pay
     21 respect to their husbands.     And the speech pleased the king
         and the princes; and the king did as Muchaius had spoken,
         and sent the decree throughout the whole kingdom, into every
         province in the language and writing thereof, that men might
         be feared by their own families.
     II.     After this when the king's wrath was appeased and he no
         more remembered Astin, nor made any mention of what she
       2 had spoken, and how he had condemned her; the king's ser-
         vants said, Let there be sought for the king a virgin of un-
        Ch. II.                     ESTHER.
         3 blemished chastity, and beautiful ; and let the king appoint of-
           ficers in all the provinces of his kingdom, and let them select
           and send to the city Susoi to the house of the women, virgins
           remarkable for beauty ; and let them be delivered to the king's
           chamberlain, the keeper of the women ; and let the things ne-
         4 cessary for purification be given them.And let the woman who
           shall please the king be made queen in the room of Astin.  And
           the proposal pleased the king, and he did so.
         5    Now there was at the city of Susoi, a man, a Jew, whose
           name was Mordecai.    He was the son of Jairus, the son of Se-
         6 meias, the son of Kisaius, of the tribe of Benjamin.   He had
           been carried away captive from Jerusalem among them whom
         7 Nabuchodonosar king of Babylon had captivated.        And this
           man had a foster child, a daughter of Aminadab, his father's
           brother; and her name was Esther.       On the decease of her
         8 parents he educated her to be a wife for himself.   But as the
           girl was beautiful, when the decree of the king was published,
           and many young women were brought to the city Susoi and
           put under the care of Gai, Esther also was brought to Gai the
         9 keeper of the women.   And the young woman pleased him and
           found favour in his sight, so that he hastened to give her the
           things for purification and the allotted portion ; and seven
           waiting maids were assigned to her out of the king's house :
           and he treated her and her maids courteously in the house of
       10 the women.    Now Esther did not disclose her family, nor her
       11 country; for Mordecai had charged her not to tell.    But Mor-
           decai walked every day before the court of the womens' house
           to see what would happen to Esther.
       12     Now the time for every young woman to go to the king
           was when she had compleated twelve months ; for thus were
           the days of their purification fulfilled.Six months they were
           anointed with oil of myrrh, and six months with aromatics
       13 and lotions used by women.     Then she goeth in to the king.
           The keeper is to deliver her to whomsoever the king order-
           eth to go with her from the womens' apartment to the king's
       14 house.   In the evening she goeth in, and in the morning goeth
           with all speed to the second house of the women, which is un-
           der the care of Gai the king's chamberlain, the keeper of the
           women, and no more cometh to the king unless called for by
                                  ESTHER.
    Ck. III.
    15 name.    So when the time was fulfilled for Esther the daughter
       of Aminadab, Mordecai's uncle, to go to the king, she neglect-
       ed nothing which the chamberlain the keeper of the women
       ordered her ; for Esther found favour with all who saw her.
    16 And Esther went in to Artaxerxes the king, in the twelfth
        month which is the month Adar in the seventh year of his
    17 reign.   And the king was enamoured of Esther, and she found
    18 favour above all the virgins, so that he set the queen's crown
       on her head and made an entertainment for all his friends and
       potentates for seven days, and to celebrate the marriage of
        Esther he made a release to those under his government.
    19     Now Mordecai performed service in the court, and Esther
       had not yet declared her family, for Mordecai having charged
    20 her in this manner to fear God and execute his commands as
        when she was with him, Esther did not alter her conduct.
    21 And two of the king's chamberlains, who were captains of his
        life guard, being displeased because Mordecai was promoted,
    22 sought to kill king Artaxerxes.      But the matter being made
        known to Mordecai, he informed Esther and she disclosed
    23 the conspiracy to the king ; whereupon the king having ex-
        amined the chamberlains, caused them to be hanged, and or-
        dered a record to be made in the royal library with an enco-
        mium on Mordecai's fidelity.
    III.     After these things king Artaxerxes honoured Haman of
     2 Amadathus the Bougaian, and promoted him, and seated him
        first of all his friends, so that all the court bowed down to him
     3 for so the king had commanded to be done.           But 3Iordecai
        did not bow down to him; whereupon they who were in the
        king's court said to him, Mordecai, Why trangressest thou
     4 the king's commands.      And when they spoke to him daily and
        he hearkened not to them, they told Hainan, that Mordecai
        disobeyed the king's commands.         Now Mordecai had told
     5 them that he was a Jew.        So when Haman understood that
     6 Mordecai did not bow down to him, he was greatly inflamed
        with wrath, and determined to destroy all the Jews throughout
     7 the whole kingdom of Artaxerxes.        And having drawn up a
        decree in the twelfth year of the reign of Artaxerxes, he cast
        lots for one day after another and for one month after another
      8 so as to destroy the whole race of Mordecai in one day.      And
            VOL. II.                  o
                              ESTHER
     Ch. IV.
        the lot having fallen on the fourteenth day of the month Adar,
        he spoke to king Artaxerxes, saying, There is a nation scat-
        tered among the nations throughout thy whole kingdom,
        whose laws differ from all the nations.And as they disobey the
        king's laws and it is not expedient for the king to let them
       9 alone ; if it seemeth good to the king, let him pass a decree to
         destroy them and I will subscribe ten thousand talents of sil-
      10 ver to the king's treasury.Thereupon the king taking off his
         ring gave it to Haman to seal the writings against the Jews.
      11 And the king said to Haman, Keep the money, and do with
      12 the nation what thou pleasest.So the king's secretaries were
         convened on the thirteenth day of the first month, and they
         wrote as Haman directed to the generals and the governors in
         every province, from India to Ethiopia a hundred and twenty
         seven provinces, and to the chiefs of the nations according to
      13 their dialect in the name of king Artaxerxes, and the decree
         was despatched by posts throughout the whole kingdom of
         Artaxerxes, to destroy the race of the Jews on a certain day
         of the twelfth month which is Adar, and to make spoil of
      14 their goods.And copies of the decree were to be sent through
         every province and all the nations were ordered to be ready
      15 against that day.And when the business was despatched at
         Susoi, the king and Haman sat down to revel, but the city
         was struck with consternation.
      IV.    Now when Mordecai knew what was done, he rent his
         clothes and put on sackcloth and strewed himself with ashes,
         and running through the street of the city, he cried with a
         loud voice, A nation is to be cut off, which hath committed no
       2 fault.But when he came to the king's gate, he stopped ; for it
         was not lawful for him to enter the court in sackcloth and
       3 ashes. And in every country where the writings were pub-
         lished there was a cry with lamentation and great grief among
       4 the Jews, and they put on sackcloth and ashes.When the
         queen's maids and chamberlains came in and told her, she
         was troubled at the news, and sent to clothe Mordecai and to
         take away his sackcloth from him; but he would not be per-
       5 suaded.  Then Esther called Achrathaius her chamberlain,
         who attended her, and sent him to learn from Mordecai an ex-
       7 act state of the matter.Whereupon Mordecai told him what
       Ch. V.                          ESTHEE.
           was done and the promise which Haman had made to the king
           of ten thousand talents to the royal treasury, that he might de-
         8 stroy the Jews ; and he gave him a copy of the decree for their
           destruction, which was published among the Susians to shew
           it to Esther, and told him that he charged her to go in and
           supplicate the king and to entreat him for the people, calling
           to mind the days of thy humiliation when thou wast brought
           up by my bounty.       Seeing Haman who is second to the king,
           hath spoken against us to destroy us, call thou upon the Lord
        9 and speak to the king for us, to deliver us from death.         Accord-
       10 ingly Achrathaius went in and told her all these words.          There-
           uponEsther said to him, Go to Mordecai and tell him, that all the
       11 nations of the kingdom know, that no man or woman who shall
           go to the kin^ into the inner court without beinof sent for, hath
           any security for life : he only can be saved to whom the king
           shall stretch forth the golden sceptre.        Now I have not been
       12 called to go to the king these thirty days.         When Achrathaius
           delivered this message of Esther to Mordecai, Mordecai said
       13 to him, Go say to her, Esther, do not flatter thyself that thou
       14 alone of all the Jews in the kingdom shall escape. Be assured, that
           if thou neglectest the present opportunity, help and protection
           will come to the Jews from some other quarter; but thou and
           thy father's house shall be destroyed.        Who knoweth but that
       15 for   this very occasion thou hast been made queen.                Then
           Esther sent back the messenger to Mordecai, saying, Go and
           assemble the Jews who are at Susoi and fast for me.          You must
           neither eat nor drink for three days ; night nor day ; and as for
           me, I and my maids will fast likewise, and then I will go to the
           king contrary to law, though perhaps I must die.
       17         So Mordecai went and did as Esther commanded him.
       V.      And on the third day Esther put on her royal apparel and
           stood in the inner court of the king's palace over against the
           king's house, when the king was sitting on his royal throne, in
         2 the royal house, over against the gate.      And when the king saw
           Esther standing in the court, she obtained favour in his sight,
           and the king held out to Esther the golden sceptre which was
           in his hand, and Esther drew near and touched the top of the
         3 sceptre. Andtheking said, What would queen Esther? And what
           is thy petition ?   To the half of my kingdom it shall be granted
                               ESTHER.
      Ch. VI.
       4 thee. Thereupon Esther said, To-day is my set day, if there-
         fore it seemeth good to the king, let him come with Hainan to
       5 the banquet which I will this day prepare.And the king said,
       6 Call Haman quickly that we may do as Esther hath said. So
         they both went to the banquet which Esther had ordered.
         And at the banquet the king said to Esther, What would queen
       7 Esther ? Whatever thou askest shall be granted.To which she
       8 replied, If I have found favour in the sight of the king, Let
         the king come again with Haman to-morrow to the banquet
         which I will prepare for them, and to-morrow I will make my
       9 request and my petition.Then Haman went out from the king
         overjoyed and gladdened, but upon seeing Mordecai the Jew
      10 in the court, he was inflamed with great indignation.So go-
      11 ing home, he called his friends and his wife Zosara, and hav-
         ing displayed to them his riches and the honour which the
         king had conferred on him ; how he had promoted him to the
      12 highest rank and made him ruler of the kingdom, the queen,
         said he, invited none to the banquet with the king, but only
      13 me : and to-morrow I am invited : but these things give me
      14 no pleasure, when I see Mordecai the Jew in the court.There-
         upon Zosara his wife and his friends said to him, Let a gal-
         lows fifty cubits high be made for thee, and early in the morn-
         ing speak to the king and let Mordecai be hanged thereon, then
         go to the banquet with the king and take thy fill of joy.And
         the thing pleased Haman. So the gallows was got ready.
      VI.    Now on that night the Lord removed sleep from the king,
         therefore he ordered his attendant to bring the book of daily
       2 records, and read to him ; and finding what was written con-
         cerning Mordecai, how he had informed the king of the king's
         two chamberlains, when they commanded the guard, and sought
       3 to lay hands on Artaxerxes, the king said, What honour or fa-
         vour did we confer on Mordecai ?  To which the king's ser-
       4 vants replied, Thou hast conferred none.And while the king
         was making inquiry concerning Mordecai's fidelity behold
         Haman was in the court.  And the king said, Who is in the
         court?  Now Haman had come to speak to the king, that he
         might order Mordecai to be hanged on the gallows which he had
       5 prepared. So the king's servants said, Behold Haman is standing
       6 in the court, and the king said, Call him in.And the king said
      Ch. VII.                     ESTHER.
         to Haman, What shall I do to the man whom I wish to honour ?
         Upon this Haman said to himself, Whom doth the king wish
       7 to honour but me ?    So he said to the king, With regard to the
       8 man whom the king wisheth to honour, Let the king's servants
         bring out the royal robes with which the king is arrayed, and
       9 the horse on which the king rideth, and give them to one of
         the most honourable of the king's friends, and let him array
         the man whom the king loveth, and mount him on the horse,
         and make proclamation through the street of the city saying,
         Thus shall it be done to every man whom the king honoureth.
     10 Then the king said to Haman, Thou hast spoken well, Do thou
         so to Mordecai the Jew, who is an attendant in the court.     Let
     11 nothing be omitted of what thou hast spoken.       So Haman took
         the robe and the horse, and having arrayed Mordecai he mount-
         ed him on the horse, and went through the street of the city
         and made proclamation saying, Thus shall it be done to every
     12 man whom the king wisheth to honour.          Then Mordecai re-
         turned to the court, and Haman went home in grief with his
     13 head covered.    And when Haman told his wife and his friends
         all that had happened to him ; his friends and his wife said, If
         Mordecai be of the race of the Jews thy humiliation before him
         is begun.  Thou shalt continue falling and shalt not be able to
     14 have thy revenge of him ; for with him is the living Grod.    And
         while they were speaking the chamberlains came to hasten
        Haman to the banquet which Esther had prepared.
     VII.     And when the king came with Haman to banquet with
      2 the queen, the king said to Esther the secoud day at the ban-
        quet, What is it queen Esther ?    What is thy request, and what
        thy petition ? to the half of my kingdom it shall be granted
      3 thee.   Thereupon she in reply said, If I have found favour in
        the sight of the king, let my life be granted at my request, and
        my people at my petition ; for I and my people are sold to be
      4 destroyed.   Had it been to be plundered and reduced to sla-
        very—that we and our children should be bondmen and bond-
        women, I would have dissembled hearing it, for the accuser
      5 is not worthy of the king's court.    And the king said, Who is
        he who hath dared to do such a thing ?      To which Esther re-
      G plied, The adversary is Haman, this bad man.      At this Haman
        was struck with consternation for fear of the king and the queen.
         Ch. VIII.                     ESTHER.
          7 Then the king rising from the banquet went into the garden,
            and Haman supplicated the queen, for he saw himself in a des-
          8 perate situation.   And on the king's returning out of the gar-
            den as Haman had prostrated himself on the sopha to suppli-
            cate the queen, the king said, What ! would he offer violence
            to my wife in my house ?     Upon hearing this Haman was con-
          9 founded.   Then Bugathan one of the chamberlains said to the
            king, Behold Hainan hath prepared a gallows for Mordecai who
            spoke for the king.     There is at Haman's house a gallows ac-
            tually erected fifty cubits high.   Thereupon the king said, Let
         10 him be hanged thereon.      So Haman was hanged on the gallows
            which he had prepared for Mordecai, and the king's anger was
         VIII.     appeased.    And on that same day the king made a pre-
            sent to Esther of all that belonged to Haman the accuser.      And
            the king sent for Mordecai ; (for Esther told him that he was
          2 her kinsman ;) and the king took the ring which he had taken
            back from Haman and gave it to Mordecai, and Esther set him
          3 over all that belonged to Haman.      Then she spoke to the king
            again and fell at his feet and besought him to avert the mis-
            chief of Haman, and what he had devised against the Jews.
          4 And when the king stretched forth the golden sceptre to Esther,
          5 she arose and stood near the king and said, If it seemeth good
             to thee, and I have found favour, let despatches be sent to re-
             verse the letters sent by Haman, which were written to destroy
          6 the Jews who are in thy kingdom.       For how can I see the cala-
             mity of my people? or how can I survive the destruction of
          7 my kindred?      Thereupon the king said to Esther, If I have
             given thee all-the substance of Haman ; and to gratify thee have
             caused him to be hanged on a gallows, because he laid his
          8 hands on the Jews, what more dost thou desire ?           Write ye
             yourselves what you please in my name, and seal it with my
             ring.  For what is written by the king's order, and sealed with
             my ring cannot be reversed.
          9     So the secretaries were convened in the first month which
             is Nisan, on the three and twentieth day thereof in the same
             year, and a letter was written to the Jews reciting all that had
             been given in charge to the lieutenants and to the chief go-
             vernors of the provinces from India to Ethiopia, a hundred and
             twenty seven provinces, to every province as they could read
              IX.
       Oh.                                               ESTHER
       10 it, then it was written by the king's command and sealed with
             his ring, (and these letters were sent by posts) that he ordered
       11 them to use their own laws in every city, and to assist each
       12 other, and to use their adversaries, and them who assaulted
             them as they pleased, on a certain day, the thirteenth of
             the twelfth month Adar, throughout the whole kingdom of
       13 Artaxerxes—that these subsequent writings were to coun-
             terbalance the former letter; and that these counterbalanc-
             ing Avritings             should be exposed to publick view through-
             out the whole kingdom, that the Jews might be ready against
       14 that day to combat their adversaries.                                 So the horsemen set out
       15 in all haste to execute the king's orders.                                   And when the decree
               T      published
              was                        at Susoi, Mordecai went forth, arrayed in a
             royal robe, wearing a crown of gold and a turban of purple
        16 cotton.           And upon seeing him the inhabitants of Susoi rejoiced.
        17 And among the Jews, there was light and joy in every city and
              province where the decree was published.                                       Wherever procla-
              mation was made, there was joy and gladness among the Jews,
              feasting and mirth ; so that many of the nations were circum-
        IX.           cised and became Jews, for fear of the Jews.                                      For in the
              twelfth month, on the thirteenth of the month x\dar, the letters
              of the king having arrived, they who assaulted the Jews on
          3 that day were destroyed.                       For none withstood them and the ter-
              ror of them continued; for the great lords and petty princes,
              and the king's secretaries, honoured the Jews ; for the dread of
          4 Mordecai fell upon them ; for the decree of the king had caus-
              ed his name to be known throughout the whole kingdom.
          6         Now in the city Susoi, the Jews slew five hundred men,
              including Pharsanes and Delphon, and Phasga and Pharadatha,
              and Barea and Sarbaka, and Marmasima and Kuphaias, and
              Arsaius and Zabuthaias, the ten sons of Hainan of Amadathu
        11 the Bugaian, the enemy of the Jews, and rifled them.                                               On that
              very day, when a return was made to the king of the number
        12 slain at Susoi, the king said to Esther, The Jews have slain in
              the city Susoi five hundred men, how then, thinkest thou,
              have they behaved in the rest of the kingdom !                                          What there-
              fore dost thou request farther, and it shall be granted thee?
        13 Thereupon Esther said to the king, Let the Jews be allowed
              to use to-morrow in like manner, that they may hang up the
        14 ten sons of Haman.                      Accordingly he granted them leave to do
                IX.                                 ESTHER.
          Ch.
               so, and ordered the bodies of the ten sons of Hainan, to be
          15 thrown out to the Jews to be hanged up.                           So the Jews at Susoi
               assembled on the fourteenth day of the month Adar, and slew
               three hundred men, but took no spoil.
          ] 6       Now the rest of the Jews who were in the kingdom, assem-
               bled and assisted each other, and had rest from their enemies,
              for they slew fifteen thousand of them on the thirteenth of the
         17 month Adar, but took no spoil.                           And having rested on the
              fourteenth of the month, they kept it as a day of rest with joy
         J 8 and gladness.            But the Jews of Susoi having assembled on the
              fourteenth and then rested, kept the fifteenth with joy and glad-
         19 ness.       Therefore because the Jews, who were scattered through
              all the distant provinces, keep the fourteenth of the month
              Adar, as a holy day, with joy, sending portions to one another,
              Mordecai wrote an account of these matters in a book, and
              sent it to all the Jews who were in the kingdom of Artaxerxes
         21 far and near, to set apart as holy days and to keep both the
              fourteenth and the fifteenth of the month Adar, for in those
         22 days the Jews had rest from their enemies : And with regard
              to the month Adar, in which they had a change from grief to
              joy and from sorrow to gladness, to keep the whole month as
              good days of weddings and joy, sending portions to their
         23 friends and to the poor.                  And the Jews took this upon them.
         24 As Mordecai wrote to them how Haman of Amadathn, the
         25 Macedonian, warred against them—as he made calculations
              and cast lots to destroy them, and as he went to the king with an
              intention to hang Mordecai, but all the evils he endeavoured to
              bring on the Jews, fell upon himself, and he and his sons were
         26 hanged ; therefore these days were called Phrouri, because of
              the lots, which in their language are called Phrouri.                               On the
              account of the things contained in that letter and of all that
              they suffered in consequence thereof, and all that happened to
         27 them, as he instituted, so the Jews took upon themselves and
              their posterity, and upon all that joined them, never to use
              them in any other manner.                  Therefore let these days be a last-
              ing memorial from generation to generation, in every city,
         28 country and province ; and let these days of Phrouri be kept
              forever ; and let the memorial of them never perish from among
              their generations.
        Ch. X.                                       ESTHER
        29         Then Esther the queen, the daughter of. Arninadab, and
             Mordecai the Jew, wrote all that they did, and a confirmation
        30 of the letter respecting the Phrouri, which Mordecai and
             Esther the queen enjoined on themselves, to their own pre-
             judice, having at that time established their counsel against
       31 their health.             Thus did Esther actually establish it, and it was
             written to be kept in remembrance.
        X.         Then the king laid a tribute upon the dominion both of the
         2 land and the sea.               But with regard to his power and his valour
             and the riches and the glory of his kingdom, behold they are
             written in the book of the kings of the Persians and the Medes
         3 to be kept in remembrance.                           Xow Mordecai was viceroy of
             king Artaxerxes, and was great in the kingdom, and being ho-
             noured by the Jews and beloved, he enforced the observance
             of their religion on all his nation.
                                                         JOB.
        I.         There was a man in the country of Ausitis whose name was
             Job.      He was a man of truth and integrity, just, pious, and
         2 who abstained from every thing that was evil.                                    He had seven
             sons and three daughters ; and his cattle were seven thousand
             sheep, three thousand camels, five hundred yoke of oxen, five
         3 hundred breeding asses.                     His attendants were numerous, and
             his works great in the country.                      He was also a man of illustri-
             ous birth, among the people of the east.
         4        Now his sons had a custom of meeting at each others
             houses, and making an entertainment, each on his day, taking
             along with them their three sisters to eat and drink with them.
         5 And soon as the days of the entertainment were over, Job sent
             for,   and purified them early the next morning, and offered
             sacrifices for them according to their numbers ; a young bull
             for a sin offering for each of them ; for Job said, Perhaps my
             children have in their mind conceived evil before God.                                           In
             this manner therefore Job acted after every of those days.
         (J       And it came to pass that on the same day, when lo ! the
             angels of God came to present themselves before the Lord,
             Satan also came with them ; and the Lord said to Satan,
         7 Whence comest thou?                       And Satan in reply said to the Lord,
                  VOL. II.                                     p
       Ch. I.                     JOB.
          Having gone round the earth, and roved the whole of it under
        8 heaven, I am come here. And the Lord said to him, Hast thou
          harboured in thy mind any thing against my servant Job ? For
          there is not like him on the earth, a man unblameable, true,
        9 pious, abstaining from every thing evil.And Satan in reply
          said before the Lord, Doth Job worship the Lord for no-
       10 thing ? Hast thou not made a hedge about all that he hath,
          abroad and at home, and about all that belong to him round
          about, and blessed the works of his hands, and multiplied his
       11 cattle on the earth ?But put forth thine hand and touch all
       12 that he hath, he will indeed openly renounce thee.Then the
          Lord said to Satan, Behold all that he hath I deliver into thine
          hand ; but himself thou must not touch.
       13    So Satan went out from the Lord, and after that, on the
          same day, when the sons and daughters of Job were drink-
       14 ing wine at their elder brother's house, lo ! a messenger came
          to Job, and said to him, The oxen were ploughing and the
       15 asses feeding near them, and the plunderers came and car-
          ried them off. Thy servants also they slew with the sword,
       16 and I alone having escaped, am come to tell thee.  While
          he was yet speaking, another messenger came, and said to
          Job; Fire hath fallen from heaven and burned up the sheep,
          and devoured the shepherds likewise ; and I, alone having
       17 escaped, am come to tell thee.While this one was still speak-
          ing, another messenger came and said to Job, The horse-
          men, having formed three bands against us, surrounded the
          camels and have carried them off, and slain thy servants
          with the sword ; and I, alone having escaped, am come to
       18 tell thee.While he was still speaking, another messenger
          came, and said to Job, While thy daughters were eating and
       19 drinking at their eldest brother's, a great blast of wind came up
          suddenly from the wilderness, and took the four corners of the
          house, so that the house fell upon thy children, and they are
          dead, and I, alone having escaped, am come to tell thee.
       20    Upon this Job rising up rent his clothes, and shaved his
      21 head, and falling on the ground he worshipped and said, Na-
          ked I came from my mother's womb, and naked I shall de-
          part hence.The Lord gave and the Lord hath taken away.As
       22 it pleased the Lord so hath it come to pass.Blessed be the
         II.                        JOB.
     Ch.
         name of the Lord.  In all these things which befel him, Job trans-
         gressed not against the Lord, nor imputed indiscretion to
         his God.
     II.    Again on the day when the angels of God came to present
         themselves before the Lord, Satan also came among them to
      2 present himself before the Lord.   And the Lord said to Satan,
         Whence coinest thou ?   And Satan said before the Lord, Hav-
         ing traversed that under heaven, and roved through the whole
      3 of it, I am come here.   And the Lord said to Satan, Thou hast
         therefore attended to my servant Job ; that there is not of those
         on the earth a man like him, guiltless, true, unblameable, ab-
         staining from all evil.Still he retaineth his innocence ; so that
         thou hast ordered the destruction of his property, without
      4 accomplishing thy purpose.     In reply to which Satan said to
         the Lord, Skin for skin.  All that a man hath he will give for
       5 his life. Only put forth thy hand, and touch his bones and his
       6 flesh, he will indeed openly renounce thee.     Then the Lord
         said to Satan, Behold I deliver him up to thee, only preserve
       7 his life. Thereupon Satan withdrew from the presence of the
         Lord, and smote Job with foul ulcers from head to foot, so
       8 that he took a shell to scrape away the ichor, and sat down in
         an unclean place without the city.
       9    And much time having elapsed, his wife said to him, How
         long wilt thou persist saying, Behold I will wait yet a little
         longer, in hope and expectation of my deliverance?      For be-
         hold the memorial of thee—those sons and daughters, whom
         I brought forth with pangs and sorrow, and for whom I toiled
         in vain, are vanished from the earth; and thou thyself sit-
         test among the putrefaction of worms, all night long in the
         open air, while I am wandering about, or working for wages,
         from place to place and from house to house, wishing for the
         setting of the sun, that I may rest from the labours and sor-
         rows I endure.   Do but say something for the Lord and die.
      10 Whereupon he looking stedfastly at her said, Like one of the
         women without understanding hast thou spoken ?      If we have
         received good things at the hand of the Lord, shall we not
         bear up under afflictions?    In all these things which befel
         him, Job transgressed not with his lips against God.
      11       Now when his three friends heard of all the calamities
         which were come upon him, they came to him each from his
                                                                                                                             !;;
            Ch. III.                                            JOB.
                 own country, namely, Eliphaz the king of the Thaimanites,
                 Baldad the sovereign of the Saucheans, and Sophar the king
                 of the Minaians.                Having made an appointment they came to
           12 him to comfort and take care of him, but seeing him at a dis-
                 tance they did not know him.                                  Then raising their voices
                 they wept aloud, and having rent each his robe and sprinkled
                 themselves with dust, they sat down by him seven days and
           13 seven nights.                And none of them spoke.                       For they saw that the
                 stroke was grievous and very great.                              After this Job opened his
                 mouth and cursed his day, saying,
            III.          Perish the day in which I was born—and the night in
             4 which they said, It is a male !                          Let that night be darkness : let
                 not the Lord from above regard it, nor splendour come upon
             5 it : but let darkness and the shadow of death cover it : upon it
             6 let there come a thick darkness.                                May the day be execrated
                 And as for that night, may a pitchy darkness sweep it away !
                 May that never come into the days of the year ; nor be num-
             7 bered among the days of months.                               But as for that night, may it
                 be sorrow, and may there never come upon it gladness or mirth !
             8 But let him curse it who curseth the day—him who is to at-
              9 tack the great sea monster.                         May the stars of that night be ob-
                 scured in darkness : may it long for light but never reach it
            10 nor see the rising of the morning star : because it shut not up
                 the door of my mother's womb : for that would have removed
            11 sorrow from mine eyes : for why did I not end my days in the
                  womb? Or when I came forth from the belly why did I not in-
            12 stantly perish ? Why was I dandled upon the knees ? And why
            13 have I sucked the breasts ? I might now have lain still and been
            14 quiet ; I might have gone to sleep and been at rest ; with des-
                 pots of the earth who gloried in their swords : or with chiefs
            15 who abounded in gold—who filled their houses with silver ;
            16 or like an untimely birth sent forth from its mother's womb :
            17 or like infants which never saw the light.                                       There the wicked
                  have ceased to be a terror : there the weary have got rest for
            18 their body : and they of old who are assembled there together
            19 have never heard the exactor's voice.                                Small and great are there
            20 on a level—the servant, with his dreaded lord.                                              For why is
                  light given to them in misery ; or life to souls distressed with
            21 sorrow, who long for death but find it not ; though they dig for
     Ch. IV.                        JOB.
     22 it as for treasures ; and would rejoice exceedingly if they should
     23 chance to find it.  For God hath shut up death from a man ; to
     24 whom it would have been a repose.      For my groaning cometh
         before my meat ; aad I pour forth tears, begirt with sorrow.
     25 For the terror, which I dreaded, is come upon me ; and that,
     26 of which I was afraid, hath befallen me.    Did I not cultivate
         peace ? was I not quiet ? was I not at rest ?Yet wrath is come
         upon me—
     IV.     Here Eliphaz the Thainianite interrupting him, said,
       2    Should frequent replies be made to thee in distress ?   But
      o who can bear the vehemence of thy words ?      For if thou hast
         instructed many ; and strengthened hands which were weak ;
      4 and raised up with words them who were fainting; and given
       5 courage to knees which were strengthless : but now, when
         trouble hath come upon thee and touched thee, thou art impa-
       6 tient : is not either thy fear grounded on folly—or thy hope ?
       7 And this calamity the effect of thy conduct ?  Kecollect there-
         fore. Who ever perished, being innocent ?    Or when were the
      8 righteous utterly destroyed ?   As I have seen men ploughing
         improper grounds : they who sow such places shall reap sor-
      9 rows.   By the decree of the Lord they shall perish ; and by the
     10 blast of his ire be utterly consumed.    The strength of a lion
         and the roaring of a lioness and the boastful pride of dragons
     11 have been extinguished.     The myrmekoleon hath j^erished for
     12 want of food : and young lions have forsaken each other.    But
         had there been any truth in thy words ; none of these evils
         would have happened to thee.
     13     Should not my ear receive unusual things coming from
         him ?  At a dreadful sound by night, when terror appalleth
     14 men, I was seized with a horror and trembling, which gave a
     15 violent shog to my bones.      A wind indeed blew full in my
     16 face, and my hair stood erect and my flesh quivered.   I started
         up, but could perceive nothing : I looked, but there was no
         form before my eyes.   I only heard a sound and a voice, say-
      17 ing : " What ! can a mortal be pure before the Lord, or a man
     18 by his works be blameless ?   If in his servants he placeth not
     19 confidence, and in his angels perceiveth some blemish : how
         should he treat them who dwell in houses of clay, (of which
     20 clay we indeed are) but as worms ? but from morning till noon
         and they are no more.   Because they could not help themselves
                                       JOB.
       Ch. V.
       21 they were destroyed.    For he blowed on them and they wither-
       V.     ed : they perished because they had not wisdom.        Appeal
           now, will any one answer.    Or shalt thou see any of the holy
        2 angels ?    Passion indeed transporteth the foolish, and envy
        3 killeth the wanderer.   Now I have seen the foolish taking root,
        4 but their sustenance was quickly consumed.        Let their child-
           dren be but far from safety, and insulted at the gates of minors,
        5 there will then be none to deliver them.      For what they have
           collected the righteous shall eat.  Nor will they themselves be
         6 exempt from wrongs, should their power be exhausted.         For
           trouble cannot come forth out of the earth ; nor will affliction
           spring up from mountains.
         7     (a) But man is born for trouble, as the young of the vul-
         8 ture soar aloft, (b) No, indeed ; but notwithstanding this, let me
           supplicate the Lord.   And call upon the Lord, the master of all,
         9 who doth great and unsearchable things—things glorious and
        10 wonderful, not to be numbered.    Who giveth rain on the earth
        11 and sendeth water on all under heaven.      Who setteth on high
           them who are low, and raiseth up them who have been ruined.
        12 Who changeth the counsels of the crafty, so that their hands
        13 can perform no enterprise.    Who entangleth the wise in their
        14 wisdom, and defeateth the counsel of the artful.     In the day
           time, darkness shall meet them, that they may grope at noon
        15 day as at night, and that they may perish in battle, and the
        16 weak escape from the hand of the mighty.       And that the fee-
           ble may have hope, and the mouth of the wicked be stopped.
        17     But happy the man whom the Lord correcteth.         Therefore
           despise not thou the correction of the Almighty. For he causeth
        18 pain and again removeth it : and him whom he smote, his
        19 hands have healed.     From six distresses he will deliver thee,
        20 and in the seventh evil shall not touch thee.   In famine he will
           deliver thee from death, and in battle save thee from the edge
        21 of the sword.    He will hide thee from the scourge of the
           tongue : and thou need'st not be afraid of impending ills.     At
        22 the wicked and unrighteous thou shalt laugh ; and of savage
        23 beasts need'st not be afraid ; for the beasts of the field shall be
        24 at peace with thee. Thou shalt know that thy family is at peace,
                         (a) An objection.  (b) The answer.
    Ch. VI.                      JOB.
    25 and that the provision for thy household shall not fail.Thou
       shalt know also that thy seed shall be great : thy children shall
    26 be like the grass of the field.And thou shalt come to the grave
       like ripe grain cut in due season ; or like a heap from a thresh-
       ing floor, carried home in time.
    27    Behold these are the things which, by investigation, we
       have found to be so. These are things which we have heard :
       apply them to thyself, if thou hast done any thing.
    VI.    To this, Job in reply said,    that some person would
     2 weigh my passion : and poise in a balance against it, my cala-
     3 mities.  But these would outweigh the sand of the sea, though
     4 you seem to think my words too vehement : for the arrows of
       the Lord are in my body, the fury of which drinketh up my
       blood : when I attempt to speak they pierce me.
     5     What! will a wild ass bray without cause ?Will it do so,
       except when in search of food ? Or will an ox low having fod-
     6 der in his stall ? Can bread be eaten without salt, or is there any
     7 relish in vain words ?For my temper cannot be calm, while
     8 my meat is horrible as the smell of a lion.  that he would
       grant !—that my request might be complied with !—that the
     9 Lord would grant me what I long for ! Let the Lord, having
    10 begun, wound me, but not utterly destroy me.   Let but the
       grave be my city, having got on its walls I will not be slack to
       enter, for I have not disputed the holy commands of my God.
    11 For what is my strength that I should bear up ! what my time
    12 that my life is prolonged ?  Is my strength the strength of
    13 stones, or is this flesh of mine made of brass ?Or have I not
    14 confided in him ? But help is far from me.—Mercy hath bid-
       den me adieu.  When the superintending care of the Lord over-
    15 looked me, my nearest friends did not regard me : like a failing
    16 brook, or like a wave of the sea, they passed me by.They who
       had assiduously paid me court, now made me a slight visit, like
    17 snow or hoar frost, which melting at the approach of heat, the
    18 place where it was is not known. Thus was I forsaken by all,
       and being undone, I became an outcast.
    19     Take a view of the ways of the Thaimanites, ye who mark
        out the Sabean tracks ! and they who trust in cities and wealth
    20 must blush.  But now when you have come to me, it is without
    22 compassion—just to see my wound and be terrified.      But
                                                                                                                   ;:
           Oh. VII.                                        JOB.
                why? Have I asked anything of you, or do I crave any help
           23 from you?—to save me from mine enemies—or deliver me
                out of the hand of the mighty ?
           24        Teach me and I will hold my tongue.                            If I have erred, tell
           25 me plainly.            But my words, it seems, are devoid of truth, be-
                cause I do not beg assistance from you.
           26        Your reproof can neither stop my speaking, nor can I bear
           27 the tone of your oration : because, you not only fall upon the
           28 orphan, but also insult your friend.                           But now having looked
           29 you in the face I will not lie.                       Sit down I pray you, and let
               there be no more reproaches.                    Indeed you again meet a righte-
          30 ous man.            For there are no reproaches on my tongue, and as for
               my palate, doth it not relish wisdom ?
           VII.          Is not the life of man on the earth a state of trial, and his
            2 days like the days of a hireling ?                       Is he not like a servant, who
                in a shade is afraid of his lord ?                   Or like a hireling waiting for
            3 his hire ?         Just so have I waited months in vain, and wearisome
            4 nights have been doled out to me.                        When I lay me down to rest,
                I say, When will it be day ?                    And soon as I rise ; I again say,
                When will it be evening ?                   I am full of pains from evening till
            5 morning ; and my body swarms with the putrefaction of worms
                and I moisten the clods of earth with the ichor of ulcers.
            6 Though my life is swifter than a word ; yet it is destroyed with
            7 vain hope.            Eemember therefore that my life is but a breath
            8 and that mine eyes shall never return again to see good.                                        The
                eye of him who seeth me now shall not see me again.                                        Thine
            9 eyes are upon me and I am gone. I am like a cloud swept clean
                away from the sky.               For when a man goeth down to the man-
           10 sion of the dead ; he can never reascend again—he can never
                return again to his own house ; nor shall his place know him
           11 any more.            For this cause then I will not refrain my mouth :
                I will speak though I am in anguish : though distressed, I will
           12 unfold the bitterness of my soul.                         Am I a sea or a dragon, that
           13 thou hast set a guard over me ?                       Did I say my bed will comfort
           14 me—I will converse with myself privately on my bed ?                                          Thou
           15 terrifiest me with dreams and affrightest me with visions.                                    Wilt
                thou drive away my life from my spirit ; and yet keep my
           16 bones from death ?                  For I am not to live forever, that I should
           17 bear patiently.             Withdraw from me ; for my life is vanity.                           For
    Ch. VIII.                JOB.
       what is man, that thou hast magnified him ; or that thou payest
    18 attention to him ?Wilt thou keep a watch upon him till the
    19 morning. And judge him to the time of going to rest ?How
       long wilt thou not let me alone : nor let me go, that I may
    20 swallow my spittle ?If I have sinned what can I do ?thou
       who knowest the hearts of men ; why hast thou set me up as
    21 thy mark to shoot at ?Am I indeed a burden to thee ?Why
       hast thou not made an oblivion of my transgression ; or a puri-
    22 fication for my sin ?Now therefore let me depart into the
      earth : and when thou risest in the morning, I am no more.
    VIII.   Here Baldad the Sauchean interposing said, How long
    2 wilt thou speak such things ?The breath of thy mouth is pro-
     3 fuse of words.Will the Lord in judging pass an unrighteous
     4 judgment ? Or will he who made all things pervert justice ? If
       thy children have sinned in his sight, he hath dismissed them
     5 for their transgression : But rise thou betimes and supplicate
     6 the Lord Almighty.If thou art pure and upright, he will hear
       thy prayer ; and render to thee the reward of righteousness.
     7 Let thy beginning therefore be ever so small, thy end will be
     8 unspeakably great.For inquire of the former generation ; and
     9 search diligently among the race of fathers ; (for we are but of
       yesterday and know nothing—for our life on the earth is but
    10 a shadow) will not they teach thee, and declare ; and from the
    11 heart utter these maxims—" Can the papyrus grow without wa-
    12 ter? Or can grass grow rank without drink?While grass is
       low it should not be mown.Before drinking doth not every
    13 herb wither ? " Such therefore shall be the end of all who forget
    14 the Lord : for the hope of the ungodly shall perish.For his
       house shall be uninhabited : and his tent shall flie away like a
    15 spider's web.Though he prop up his house, it cannot stand:
    16 Though he take hold of it, it will not abide, for is he somewhat
       green underneath the sun ?Though a tender branch may start
    17 up from his rottenness; his bed is on a heap of stones: and
    18 can he live among flint stones ?Should he wish to drink, the
       place will disappoint him.
    19    Hast thou not seen such things—that such is the catastro-
       phe of the wicked ?But out of the ground he will cause ano-
    20 ther to spring up : for the Lord will not cast off the innocent,
    21 nor from the ungodly accept a gift : but he will fill the mouth
          VOL. II.             Q
              Ch. IX.                                                   JOB.
                    of the upright with, laughter, aud their lips with songs of thanks-
              22 giving : and their enemies shall be clothed with shame ; and
                     the dwellings of the wicked shall come to naught.
              IX.            To this Job replied, Of a truth I know that it is so.                                                   For
                3 how can a mortal be righteous with the Lord ?                                                  For were it his
                    pleasure to come to trial with him ; he could not join issue to an-
                4 swer one charge of his in a thousand.                                         For he is wise in heart
                    and strong and great.                       Who is hardy enough to stand up against
                5 him who maketh mountains old insensibly—who overturneth
                6 them in his anger—who shaketh the earth to its foundations,
                7 so that the pillars thereof totter—who commandeth the sun and
                8 it riseth not; and who sealeth up against the stars—who alone
                    hath outspread the heaven ; and who walketh on the sea as on
                9 a pavement—who is the maker of the Pleiads and Hesperus,
              10 and of Arcturus and the chambers of Notus—who doth things
                    great and unsearchable ; things glorious and wonderful not to
              11 be numbered ?                      When he passed over me I did not see him.
              12 When he passed by me, I did not know how.                                                        If he dismiss
                    who shall bring back ?                            Or who shall say to him, What hast
              13 thou done ?                  For he himself slighted anger—by him the mon-
              14 sters under heaven were bowed down.                                             But if he will come to
              15 a trial with me, or will take cognisance of my affairs                                                     (for if I
                                                                                                                          ;
                    be righteous will he not hearken to me—shall I not supplicate
              16 his decision ?                   And if I call and he will not answer, I do not
             17 believe that he hath hearkened to my voice ? ) Let him not break
                    me with a tempest.
              18          But he hath multiplied my wounds without cause.                                                      For he
                    suffereth me not to take breath, and hath filled me with bitter-
              19 ness.           For because he is strong, he prevaileth.                                        Who then can
             20 withstand his decrees ?                             For if I am righteous shall my mouth
                   be wicked ?               And if I am blameless, shall I go away crouching ?
             21 For if I have acted wickedly, I am not conscious to myself:
                    Nevertheless my life is taken away.
             22           Say then, wrath destroyeth the great and powerful : that the
             23 wicked fall by an untimely death.                                     But the righteous are laugh-
             24 ed to scorn : for they have been delivered into the hands of the
                    wicked.           He covereth the faces of the judges of that wrath.                                                If
                    it is not he, who is it ?
             25           Now my days are swifter than a courier.                                             They are gone
                                                                                                        ;
                                                     JOB.
        Ch. X.
       26 without being perceived.                  Is there any track left by ships in
       27 their passage ? Or of an eagle flying in pursuit of its prey ? Now
            if I say, Let me forget speaking, let me bow down my face and
       28 groan : I shudder in all my limbs ; for I know that thou wilt
       29 not let me alone though innocent.                          Now since I am wicked,
       30 why have I not died ?                 For though I have washed myself with
       31 snow, and purified myself with clean hands : thou hast so tho-
       32 roughly plunged me in filth that my very robes abhor me.                                  For
            thou art not a man as I am, with whom I can contend ; that we
       33 may come together to a trial.                         that there were a mediator
       34 betwixt us—one to determine between and hear us both.                                     Let
            him remove his rod from me ; and let not the dread of him ter-
       35 rify me—Let me not be terrified, but speak, (for in that case
       X.         I am not master of myself) weary of my life I would pour
            forth with groans my words before him : oppressed as I am I
         2 would speak in the bitterness of my soul, and say to the Lord,
            Teach me not to be impious.                     Now, for what cause hast thou
         3 thus condemned me ? Is it agreeable to thee that I should com-
            mit iniquity ; seeing thou hast rejected the works of thy hands
         4 and favoured the counsel of the wicked ?                        As a mortal looketh
             dost thou look down ?              Or as a man looketh wilt thou behold ?
         5 Are thy days as the days of a mortal ; or thy years, the years
         6 of a man ; that thou hast sought out mine iniquity, and diligently
         7 traced my sins ?            For thou knowest that I am not impious : but
         8 who can deliver out of thy hands ?                      Thy hands have fashioned
             me and made me.             After that thou hast changed thy mind and
         9 smitten me.           Kemember that thou hast made me of clay, and
        10 art turning me again into mould.                       Hast thou not churned me
        11 as milk, and curdled me as cheese ; and clothed me with skin
        12 and flesh ; and fenced me with bones and sinews, and granted
            me life and favour, and by thy visitation preserved my spirit ?
        13 As thou hast these things in thyself; I know that thou canst
             do all things, and that with thee nothing is impossible.
        14        If I indeed have sinned inadvertently, thou hast me in
        15 custody, and hast not acquitted me of transgression.                               If I in-
             deed am impious, wo is me.                   And if I be righteous, I cannot
        16 hold up my head, for I am full of ignominy.                           For I am hunted
             as a lion for slaughter.              For turning again furiously thou de-
        17 stroyest me.           Kenewing the examination against me, thou hast
                                                                                                                    ;
                                                            JOB.
            Ch. XL
                  exercised against me great wrath ; and hast brought against
            18 me tortures.              Why then didst thou bring me forth from the
                  womb? And why did I not die without an eye seeing me
            19 and become as if I never had existed ?                            Why was I not carried
            20 from the womb to the grave ?                          Is not the term of my life of
            21 short duration ? permit me to enjoy a little repose : before I
                  go, whence I shall not return ; to a land dark and gloomy—to
            22 a land of everlasting darkness ; where there is no light—no
                  seeing the life of mortals.
            XI.          Here Sophar and Minaian answering said, He who speak-
                  eth much should be answered : else the fine speaker thinketh
                 himself just ; and the short lived offspring of woman is blessed.
              3 Be not profuse of words, because there is none to answer thee :
              4 nor say I am pure in works and irreprehensible before him.
              5 But how would the Lord speak to thee ; were he to open his
              6 lips against thee ?              Indeed were he to unfold to thee the power
                 of wisdom ; because it must needs be double to what are with
                 thee : then thou wouldst know that what have come upon
                 thee from the Lord are answerable to the sins which thou
                 hast committed.
              7        Canst thou trace the footsteps of the Lord ?                              Or hast thou
              8 reached the extent of what the Almighty hath done ?                                            The
                 heaven is high, what then canst thou do ?                           And there are things
                 deeper than the mansion of the dead; what dost thou know?
              9 Of greater extent than the measure of the earth or the breadth
            10 of the sea.           Now were he to overturn all these, who could say
            11 to him what hast thou done ?                          For he knoweth the works of
                 the wicked, and on seeing wickedness will not overlook it.
            12 But man vainly floateth about in words—but a mortal born
            13 of woman is like a wild ass.                      For if thou hast made thy heart
            14 pure, and lift thy hands to him : if there be any iniquity in thy
                 hand, put it far from thee ; and let not injustice lodge in thy
            15 dwelling.            For thus will thy countenance brighten like pure
                  water : thou wilt disrobe thyself of filth, and no more be ter-
            16 rifled : thou shalt forget thy trouble like a wave that is past
                 and not be afraid ; and thy wish will spring up like the morn-
            17 ing star ; and life will arise for thee from noon day : and thou
            18 shalt be in a state of security because thou hast hope.                                        And
            19 out of sorrow and care, peace will shine upon thee.                                     For thou
              ?                                                           ———
     Ch. XII.                        JOB.
        shalt rest at ease, and none shall be at war with thee : and
     20 many, changing their conduct, will intreat thy favour.     But safe-
        ty shall forsake them : for their hope shall be their destruction ;
         and the eyes of the wicked shall melt away.
     XII.       To this Job replied, You, forsooth, are men, and wis-
      3 dom will die with you.      But I indeed have understanding as
      4 well as you.   For a just man and one irreprehensible hath been
      5 made a mocking stock.      For it hath been ordered that for a
         time he shall fall beneath others : and that his houses shall be
         wasted by transgressors.    Nevertheless let no wicked man in-
      6 dulge a confidence that he shall escape condemnation.         Who-
         ever provoke the Lord to anger shall not they also undergo a
         trial
      7     But ask, I pray thee, the beasts of the field, if they could
         speak to thee—and the birds of the air, if they could tell thee
      8 speak to the earth, if it could converse with thee—even the
      9 fishes of the sea can tell thee.  Who then among all these doth
         not know that the hand of the Lord hath done these things ?
     10 Is not the life of all living beings in his hand—and the breath
         of every man ?
     11     The ear indeed discerneth words and the palate tasteth
     12 meats.    By length of time wisdom is acquired, and by long life,
     13 experience.    With him is wisdom and power—with him coun-
     14 sel and understanding.     If he demolish who can rebuild?     If he
     15 shut against men, who can open?          If he withhold water he
         drieth the earth.   And when he let it loose, he overthrew and
     16 destroyed it,     With him is strength and power—with him
     17 knowledge and understanding.        He hath led counsellors away
     18 captive.   And confounded the judges of the earth.      It is he who
         settleth kings on thrones and girded their loins with a girdle
     19 who sendeth priests into captivity and overthrew the sove-
     20 reigns of the earth—who changeth the lips of liege men and
     21 knoweth the wisdom of elders—who poureth contempt on
     22 princes and hath healed them who were low—who revealeth
         deep things from darkness ; and hath brought to light the shades
     23 of death—who leadeth nations into error and destroyeth them
     24 who prostrateth nations and conducteth them—who changeth
         the hearts of the rulers of a land and hath caused them to wan-
     25 der in a way which they knew not : That they might grope in
        Ch. XIII.                         JOB.
            darkness without light ; and that they might stagger like a
            drunken man.
        XIII.      Behold these things mine eye hath seen and mine ear
          2 heard : for I know all that you know and am not inferior to
          3 you in knowledge.      Nevertheless I would speak to the Lord;
          4 and argue before him, were it his pleasure.       Now you are all
          5 bad physicians and curers of maladies.       Could you hold your
            peace, it would be your wisdom.
          6     Hear now the argument of my mouth and the pleading of
          7 mylips. Are you not speaking in the presence of the Lord ? And
          8 do you in his presence utter deceit in a solemn manner ?          Or
          9 will you keep back any thing ? Judge for yourselves.        For will
            it be well for you, if he mark your steps ?    For though feigning
         10 all these things you apply them for him : he will, notwithstand-
            ing this, reprove you.   And if you secretly respect persons ; will
         11 not his awful majesty confound you ; and the terror of him fall
         12 upon you ?     And your boasting be dissipated like ashes ; and
             your bodies be reduced to clay.
         13     Keep silence that I may speak, and have some respite
         14 from wrath.    Taking my flesh in my teeth I will put my life in
         15 my hand.     Though the Almighty, as he hath begun, may sub-
         16 due me : yet I will speak and plead before him.        And this will
             contribute to my deliverance : for no deceit shall come before
             him.
         17      Hear, hear my words : for I will proclaim them in your
         18 hearing.    Behold I am near my trial.      I know that I shall ap-
         19 pear just.   For who is there who will emplead me ?       For now I
             will be silent and expire.
         20      Now two things thou art to grant me : then I will not hide
         21 myself from thy presence—withdraw thy hand from me : and
         22 let not the dread of thee overwhelm me with terror.        Then call
             and I will answer thee : or speak and I will make thee a reply.
         23 How many are my sins and mine iniquities ?           Teach me what
         24 they are.    Why dost thou hide thyself from me and hast ac-
          25 counted me thine adversary ?      Canst thou be afraid of one who
             is like a leaf moved with a breath of wind ?    Or as against dried
             grass carried away with a blast, dost thou set thyself against
          26 me ?    For thou hast written evil things against me ; and laid to
          27 my charge the inadvertencies of youth ; and put my feet in a
                                                                                                                                       ;
                                                                  JOB.
        Ch. XIV.
              clog and watched all my doings ; and hast tracked the soles of
              my feet.
        XIV.               He who is born of a woman waxeth old like a leathern
          1 bag : or like a garment which is moth eaten ; for he is mor-
          2 tal, short lived and full of disquiet : or like a flower which fell
               when in bloom.                    He glideth away indeed like a shadow and
          3 can make no stay.                         And is it not such a one thou hast called
               to account ; and caused such a one to come to trial before
          4 thee ?            For who can be free from stain ?                                   Surely none.                Whe-
           5 ther the course of his life on earth be one day ; or months be
               numbered out for him, he cometh to the term thou hast set,
           6 but cannot pass it.                         Turn away from him, that he may take
           7 rest, and comfort his life like a hireling.                                       For there is hope for
               a tree ; for if lopped, it may sprout again, and the tender branch
           8 may not fail.                  And if its root become old in the earth, or die
           9 on a rock : its stem by the scent of water may blossom ; and
         10 produce a crop like a tree lately planted. But when a man dieth
         11 he is gone : when a mortal falleth, he is no more.                                                        For in a
               course of time a sea is spent ; and a river when unsupplied is
                                                          T         composed in the grave cannot rise
         12 dried up : and man when
               again—until the heaven be folded up ; they shall not be awak-
                ened from their sleep.
         13                !  that thou hadst kept me in the mansion of the dead ;
                and hid me till thine indignation should cease : and that thou
                wouldst set me a time when thou wouldst remember me
         14 (for though a man die he may be revived, after finishing the
                days of this life of his,) I would wait patiently, until I come
          15 again into existence.                         Then call and I will answer.                              But reject
          16 not the works of thy hands. Now thou hast numbered up my de-
          17 vices, and not one of my inadvertencies could escape thee.                                                       Thou
                hast sealed up mine iniquities in a bag ; and set a mark on every
          18 transgression, which I inadvertently committed.                                                      But not to
                mention that a falling mountain will continue its fall ; even a
          19 rock may by force be removed from its place.                                                       Waters have
                worn stones smooth; and waters have washed away mounds
          20 of earth ; and thou hast destroyed the patience of man.                                                           Thou
                hast brought him to an end, and he is gone : thou hast set thy
          21 face against him and dismissed him.                                          And though his children
                 be multiplied, he knoweth it not : and if they become few in
                                                                                         !                                 —;
                    XV.                                         JOB.
            Ch.
            22 number, he doth not perceive it.                                His flesh hath been for no-
                  thing but to suffer pain ; and his soul only to suffer grief.
            XV.              Here Eliphaz the Thaimanite taking up the argument
              2 said, Will a wise man give the wind of knowledge for an an-
                  swer; though he hath therewith filled his labouring belly?
              3 Or in pleading use arguments which he ought not; and words
              4 in which there is no profit ?                          Hast thou not cast off fear, and
              5 used such arguments before the Lord?                                       By the arguments of
                  thine own mouth thou art guilty ; and hast not discerned the
              6 arguments of the mighty.                           Let thine own mouth and not me
                  convict thee : thine own lips indeed will testify against thee.
              7         What! wast thou born before men?                                  Or wast thou brought
              8 into being before the hills ?                         Or hast thou heard the establish-
                  ed system of the Lord ?                      Or hath God used thee as his coun-
              9 sellor ?          Or hath wisdom made application to thee ?                                    For what
                  knowest thou, which we do not know?                                         Or what dost thou
            10 understand which we do not?                                  Among us indeed are elders
            11 and a°'ed men, more venerable for years than thy father.                                               Thou
                  hast been chastised less than thy sins deserve.                                    Thou hast spo-
            12 ken with excessive haughtiness.                                To what a pitch of boldness
                  is thy heart raised ; or at what have thine eyes taken aim ; that
             13 thou shouldst vent wrath before the Lord, and utter such
             14 words from thy mouth ?                           For who being mortal can be irre-
                  prehensible?              Or can the offspring of woman be righteous?
             15 If in his holy ones he placeth not confidence ; and the heaven
             16 is not pure in his sight ; how abominable and filthy must man
                  be      who drinketh iniquity in, like water
                       ;                                                                                — me tell
             17         But let me tell thee—hear what I have seen                                          let
             18 thee what the wise say, and their fathers have not concealed
             19 They, to whom alone the earth was given ; and no stranger
             20 came among them.                       " The whole life of the wicked is spent in
                   anxiety.         Though a certain number of years is given to the
             21 oppressor: yet the sound of terror is in his ears.                                             When he
             22 seemeth to be at peace his destruction shall come.                                               Let him
                   not hope to return out of darkness ; for he is already doomed
             23 to the edge of the sword; and destined to be food for vul-
                   tures.       He knoweth within himself that he waiteth for a fall
             24 and a dark day will torture him.                                  Distress and anguish will
                   overwhelm him ; like a general at the head of troops falling
                                                                          —,:
     Ch. XVI.                         JOB.
     25 upon him.     Because he lifted up his hands against the Lord
     26 and hardened his neck against the Lord Almighty : therefore
         he ran upon him contemptuously, with the thick boss of his
     27 buckler.    Because he covered his face with fatness; and made
     28 collops of fat upon his thighs: let him therefore lodge in de-
         serted cities ; and go into uninhabited houses : and what they
     29 had got ready, let others carry off.     Let him neither be enrich-
         ed, nor what he hath continue.      Let him never cast a shadow
     30 on the ground, nor escape out of darkness.       Let the wind blast
     31 his bud, and his blossom fall prematurely.     Let him not hope to
     32 continue, for vanity shall be his portion.     Let his branch lop-
         ped unseasonably, die; and let not his young shoot nourish.
     33 Let him be gathered like unripe grapes before his time, and
     3-1 fall like the olive blossom."   For death is the testimonial of a
         wicked man : and a fire shall consume the tents of bribery.
     35 He shall conceive sorrows and bring forth vanity, and his belly
         shall produce an illusion.
     XVI.       To this Job replied, I have heard many such things,
      3 ye miserable comforters all ! what ! have words of wind a re-
         gular succession?    Or can they give thee offence, considering
      4 thine answer ?    I indeed could speak as you do.     But were your
         soul in my soul's stead, would I insult you with words and
      5 shake my head at you ?       And should there be strength in my
      6 mouth ; would I not spare moving my lips ?           For if I speak
         shall I not bemoan the wound ?      And if I hold my peace, shall
      7 I be any the less wounded ?       But now when he hath made me
      8 a poor rotten fool ; thou indeed hast fallen upon me.         My lie
         is become a witness, and hath risen up against me—it hath
      9 answered me to my face.        When in his wrath he threw me
         down and gnashed his teeth at me ; the darts of his executi-
     10 oners fell upon me.     When with the darts of his eyes he had
         transfixed me—with his spear had brought me on my knees
     11 they with one consent rushed upon me.        The Lord hath indeed
         delivered me up to the unrighteous ; and turned me over to
     12 the ungodly.     When I was at peace he broke me up—taking
         me by the hair he shook me—he set me up as a mark.            They
     13 surrounded me with javelins, darting them into my reins
     14 without mercy they poured my gall on the ground.               They
         shot me, one deadly wound on another—they ran against me
             VOL. II.                   R
                                                                 —
           XVII. XVIII.            JOB.
       Ch.
       15 with all their might.They sewed sackcloth on my skin : and
       16 my strength was extinguished in the dust.  My belly was
          burned up with wailing ; and on mine eyelids were the shades
       17 of death : yet there was no iniquity in my hands.And my
          prayer was pure.
       18       earth, cover not the blood of my flesh, nor let there be
       19 a place for this cry of mine.Even now, behold my witness is
          in heaven ; and he who hath a perfect knowledge of me is on
       20 high.    that my suit could come before the Lord, and that
       21 before him mine eye could drop a tear ! That a man could plead
       22 before the Lord, as a son of man may with his neighbour !But
          my numbered days are come, and I must go the way, by which
       XVII.    I cannot return.I am dying with a tortured spirit, and
        2 wishing for a burial, but do not obtain it.I am supplicating
          in distress, yet what have I done ?Strangers have stolen my
        3 substance—who is the man ? Let him be brought to trial with
        4 me. Because thou hast hid their heart from understanding,thou
        5 shouldst not for this cause exalt them.Shall he reckon mis-
          fortunes for his portion—and were his eyes melted for his chil-
        6 dren?  But thou hast made me a by-word among nations, and
        7 I am become a subject of laughter for them.For mine eyes are
        8 dim with sorrow, and I am closely besieged by all.At this the
          upright are astonished. "Now the righteous should prevail
        9 over the wicked: and he who is faithful should hold on his
       10 way : and he who hath clean hands should take courage."On
          these maxims you all rely. But come now ; for I do not find
       11 truth among you : my days have passed in groans, and my very
       12 heart strings are broken.I have put night for day.Is light
       13 near on account of darkness?For though I have waited pati-
          ently, the mansion of the dead is to be my house, and my bed
       14 is made in darkness.I have called on death to be my father
       15 and on corruption to be my sister and mother. Where then
          have I any ground of hope ? Or shall I see those good things
       16 of mine?  Shall they go down with me to the mansion of the
          dead?  Or shall we go together beneath the mound ?
       XVIII.     Here Baldad the Sauchean interrupting him said, How
          long will it be e're thou wilt stop ?Forbear that we may speak.
        3 Whyshould we like beasts be silent before thee ?Passion hath
        4 taken possession of thee.What! If thou die, shall the earth be
           Ch. XIX.                                                  JOB.
                 uninhabited?                  Or the mountains overturned from their foun-
                 dations ?
             5          The light of the wicked shall indeed be extinguished ; and
             6 from them a spark shall not ascend.                                       The light in his dwelling
                 shall be darkness, and the lamp for him shall be extinguished.
             7 " Let the weakest plunder his substance, and his own counsel
             8 subvert him.                 His foot is caught in a trap ; in a net let him be
             9 entangled, and let snares come upon him."                                              He will strengthen
           10 the thirsty against him.                            " A gin is hid for him in the ground,
           11 and the trap for him by the way side.                                              May surrounding sor-
                 rows destroy him, and many come round his foot in sore fa-
                 mine."
           12           For him indeed a direful destruction is prepared.                                                     " May
                 the toes of his feet be eaten up, and death devour his comeliness.
           14 May health be expelled from his dwelling, and distress lay hold
           15 on him with the authority of a king."                                         It will make its abode in
                 his tent ; in his night all his finery will be strewed with sulphur.
           16 Underneath his roots will be dried up ; and above, his product
           17 will fall.             " May the memorial of him be destroyed from the
           18 earth.            When his name shall be published abroad, may they
           19 drive him from light to darkness."                                          He will not be acknow-
                 ledged among his people, nor will his household be safe under
           20 the cope of heaven.                         But in his possessions others shall live se-
                 cure.        They who came after groaned for him, but horror seized
           21 them who were before.                            Such are the houses of the unrighteous,
                 and such the place of them who know not the Lord.
           XIX.               To this Job replied, How long will you make my soul
             3 sorrowful ?               You are indeed destroying me with words.                                              Know
                 at least—because the Lord hath dealt thus with me                                                     you speak
                                                                                                                   ;
             4 against me—without shame you fall upon me.                                                          Take it for
                 granted that I have erred (though my error remaineth with my-
                 self) in speaking words which I ought not : and that my words
             5 are erroneous and unseasonable : but granted also, That you mag-
             6 nify yourselves against me, and insult me with reproach.                                                        Know
                 then, That it is the Lord who hath terrified me, and raised his
             7 bulwark against me.                           Behold I laugh at reproach—I will not
             8 speak—I will cry aloud, There is no judgment.                                                      I am fenced
                 about and cannot get out.                           Before me he hath placed darkness.
             9 He hath stripped me of my glory, and hath taken the crown
                                                                                                                                                            .
                Ch. XX.                                                          JOB.
                10 from my head.                         He broke me on every side and I fled : and he
                11 hath cut down my hope like a tree.                                                  When he exercised great
               12 wrath against me, and counted me as an enemy : With one
                       consent his troops fell upon me—they who were in ambush
               13 beset my ways.                         My brethren stood aloof from me, they acknow-
                      ledged strangers rather than me ; and my friends were not com-
               14 passionate.                     My nearest relations paid me no attention : and
               15 they who knew my name forgot me.                                                          As for my domesticks
               16 and maid servants, in their view I was a stranger.                                                                      When I
               17 called my servant, he did not answer me. When with my mouth
                      I entreated and supplicated my wife, and called affectionately
               18 the children of my concubines : they renounced me forever.
               19 When I insist, they speak against me.                                                     They who saw me, ab-
               20 horred me ; and they whom I loved rose up against me.                                                                            The
                      flesh next my skin became rotten, and my bones begin to be
               21 corroded.                  Pity me, pity me,                            my friends, for the hand of the
               22 Lord hath touched me.                                   Why do you persecute me as the Lord
                      cloth, and are not satisfied with my flesh ?
               23            O that my words were written and recorded in a book for-
               24 ever !              That they were engraven with a graver of iron on lead,
               25 or on rocks !                     For I know that he is eternal, who is about to dis-
               26 solve me on earth, to raise again this skin of mine which draw-
                      eth up these things.                          For from the Lord those things have been
               27 done to me, of which I alone am conscious—which mine eyes
                      have seen, and no other; and which have all been done to me
               28 in my bosom.                        Now if you will say, What shall we say against
                      him? And what ground of accusation shall we find in him ?
               29 Stand in awe, I beseech you, of the developing scene ; for wrath
                      will come upon the unrighteous, and it shall then be known,
                      where their filthiness is.
               XX.                Then answered Sophar the Minaian and said,
                  2 I did not suppose that thou wouldst return such an answer,
                  3 but do not you feel it more than I ?                                             Am I to hear my modesty
                      corrected?                And is a spirit from its consciousness to answer
                  4 me? Thou hast never known such things heretofore, from the
                  5 time man was placed on the earth ! " But the mirth of the wicked
                       is sudden ruin, and the joy of transgressors, destruction, though
                       his gifts mount up to heaven, and his sacrifice reach the clouds
                  7 For when he thinketh that he is now firmly established, then
                                                                                                                             !
         Cb. XXI.                                              JOB.
               shall he be utterly destroyed ; and they who have seen him will
           8 say, Where is he ?                    Like a dream which is gone, he cannot be
           9 found.           He is vanished, like a spectre in the night.                                     The eye
               which saw him, shall see him no more; and his place shall no
         10 more him observe.                       Let minors destroy his children, and his
          11 own hands light up the signals of distress.                                          His bones were
               full of his youth, but with him it shall go to rest beneath the
         12 mound.              If wickedness be sweet in his mouth, he will hide it
               under his tongue.                 He will not be sparing of it, nor forsake it,
               but will gather it together in his mouth ; therefore let him not
               be able to help himself.                      The poison of an asp is in his belly.
          15 Eiches collected unrighteously shall be vomited up.                                            Out of his
          16 house let an angel drag him.                            May he suck the venom of dra-
          17 gons! and may the tongue of the viper slay him! may he
               never see the milking of his kine, nor the distribution of his
          18 honey and butter !                     He hath wearied himself for emptiness and
               vanity—for riches, of which he shall not have a taste, which
          19 are like a bur, neither to be chewed nor drunk.                                             Because he
                broke up the families of princes ; and plundered dwellings and
          20 suffered them not to stand.                         There is no security for his posses-
          21 sions ; nor shall he be saved by what he valueth highly.                                                  Not
                a scrap of his provisions is left.                         His good things shall not, on
          22 this account, be renewed.                          In the fullness of his sufficiency he
                shall be afflicted, and all manner of distress shall come upon him.
          23 If by any means he be permitted to fill his belly ; may he send
                against him fiery indignation, and pour upon him sorrows
          24 Let him not escape from the edge of the sword !                                            Maythe bra-
                sen bow wound him, and the dart pass through his body, and
          26 stars light on his dwellings !                             May terrors stalk around him
                and total darkness await him !                            An unkindled fire devoureth
          27 him.           May his guest also afflict his family !                                may the heaven
          28 disclose his iniquities, and the earth rise up against him !                                             May
                destruction bring his house to an end !                                  Upon him may there
          29 come a day of wrath ! "                          This is the portion of a wicked man
                from the Lord, and this his possession, from the superintend-
                ing Being.
           XXI.             To this Job replied, hear, hear my words.                               Can I not have
             3 this consolation from you ?                        Bear with me, and when I speak do
             4 not deride me.                What! ismy pleading with man ? Or, why shall
         7
        Ch. XXI.                           JOB.
         5 I not be inflamed with indignation ?      Look on me and be amaz-
         6 ed, having laid your hand on your cheek.       For at the bare recol-
         7 lection I shudder: and tortures rack my flesh.          Why do the
         8 wicked live and grow old, abounding in wealth ?           Their crops
         9 are to their wish, and their children before their eyes.         Their
            houses flourish and they have no dread ; and a scourge from
        10 the Lord is not upon them.         Their kine bring not forth un-
            timely births, but go their time safely, and cast not their
        11 calves. They abide continually like a flock, and their little ones
        12 frolick about them.      They take up the psaltery and kithara,
        13 and are charmed with the sound of the song; and having spent
           their life in festivity, they are composed to rest in the peaceful
        14 grave.    Yet he saith to the Lord, " Depart from me, I desire not
        15 to know thy ways.         What is the Almighty, that we should
            serve him : and what the advantage, that we should wait on
        16 him ? "   For their prosperity was by their own hands.
        1       Now doth not he observe the works of the wicked ? and
            should not the lamp, at least of wicked men, be extinguished,
            and destruction come upon them?          And pangs seize them, on
        18 account of anger: and they be like chaff driven by the wind,
        19 or like dust swept away by a whirlwind ?              His substance
            should fail from among his children.        He should retribute to
        '20 him.   And he should know it.      His eyes should see his own de-
        21 struction : and he should not escape from the Lord.           Because
            his desire is in his family with him ; therefore the number of
            their months should be cut short.
        22      Is it not the Lord who teacheth wisdom and understanding,
        23 and doth he discriminate murderers ?        One is to die in his full
        24 strength, all his life being successful and prosperous; his en-
            trails are cloathed with fat, and his bones abound with marrow.
        25 Another dieth with bitterness of soul, having never tasted any
        26 thing good.    But they are both composed alike under ground,
            and putrefaction hath covered them.
        27     I know you charge me with presumption, that you will say,
           Where is the house of the chief, and where is the covering of
            the tents of the wicked ?
        29     Ask them who travel the high ways, or their monuments,
        30 you cannot miss them.        Because the wicked is reserved for a
            day of destruction : let them be carried to prison for the day
     Ch. XXII.                   JOB.
     31 of his indignation. Who shall tell him his way to his face, and
     32 who shall retribute to him what he hath done ? Even when he
        should be carried to the burying place, he had caused a watch
     33 to be kept over his tomb.  The flints of the torrent have been
        sweetened for him, and every man shall go after him, as innu-
     34 merable have gone before him.    How then do ye comfort me
        with vanity ?  There is nothing from you to give me consola-
        tion.
     XXII.      Upon this, Eliphaz the Thaimanite answered, and said,
      2 Is it not the Lord who teacheth wisdom and understanding?
      3 What! Is it any advantage to the Lord, if thou, in works, art
        irreprehensible ? or any profit, that thou shouldst keep a straight
      4 course?   Or will he, instituting a suit against thee, argue and
      5 come to a trial with thee ?Is not thy wickedness great, and thy
      6 sins innumerable ?  Thou hast taken pledges of thy brethren for
      7 nought, and hast stripped the naked of their cloathing. Thou
        hast not given drink to the thirsty : but hast robbed the hungry
      8 of their morsel. Thou hast respected the persons of some and
        settled them in the land; but hast sent widows away empty,
     10 and done injustice to orphans.   Therefore snares have beset
        thee, and an unexpected war hath made thee shudder.      The
        light hath become darkness to thee, and water hath overwhelm-
     12 ed thee when asleep.    " Doth not he who dwelleth on high,
     13 observe ; but hath he humbled the haughty ? "  Yes, thou hast
        said, How can the Almighty know ?      Can he judge in dark-
        ness?
     14     A cloud is his covering, so that be cannot be seen, though
     15 he traverse the circuit of heaven. Thou wilt not keep the an-
        cient way, which righteous men trod, who were borne aloft,
     17 and whose foundations were the surgy stream.     As for them
        who said, What can the Lord do to us, or what can the Al-
     18 mighty bring upon us?      (He, who had indeed filled their
        houses with good things, though the counsel of the wicked is
     19 far from him.)   When the righteous saw them, they smiled,
     20 and he who was blameless laughed them to scorn.  Had not the
        whole of them disappeared, a fire would have consumed the
        residue.
     21     Become hardened now, if thou remainest ; and shalt thou
        be rewarded with good things?
           XXIII.                      JOB.
       Ch.
       22    Beceive, I pray thee, from his mouth, the terms of deliver-
       23 ance, and lay up his words in thy heart. If thou wilt return and
          humble thyself before the Lord, having removed iniquity far
          from thy dwelling, thou shalt be placed on a mount, founded
       25 on a rock, and be like the rock of the torrent Sophir.   Then
          will the Almighty be thy defence from enemies ; and he will
       26 make thee pure as silver tried by fire. Then indeed thou shalt
          have confidence before the Lord ; and mayst look up to heaven
       27 with cheerfulness.   And when thou prayest to him, he will
          hearken to thee, and will enable thee to pay thy vows ; and he
          will assign thee an habitation of righteousness, and light shall
          shine upon thy ways.
       29     Because thou hast humbled thyself, thou wilt say, Such a
          one was insolent—but he will save him whose eyes are lowly.
       30 He indeed will save the innocent.   Save thyself therefore, with
          clean hands.
       XXIII.      In reply to this, Job said, I know very well, this trial
        2 is not in my disposal. And that his hand is made heavy by my
        3 groaning.   But O that some person would let me know, that I
        4 might find him, and come to an issue ; that I might order the
          trial of myself, and that he would stop my mouth with argu-
        5 ments.   That I might know what remedies he will prescribe for
        6 me, and understand what he will announce to me !    Though he
           may come against me with great majesty, he will not employ
        7 it in threatening me.   For truth and argument proceed from
        8 him ; and he would bring my cause to an issue.      For if I am
           to go first and am no more, how do I know what will be at the
        9 last ? When he wrought on my left, I comprehended not ; he
       10 may encompass my right and I not see.    For he already know-
       11 eth my way and hath tried me like gold.    And I will come out
       12 at his commands ; for I have kept his ways, and will not turn
           aside from his commands, nor transgress in my bosom : indeed
       13 I have hid his words.   But if he hath judged thus, who can
       14 gainsay him?    For he hath done what was his pleasure.    For
           this cause my shuddering is at him ; and on being chastened,
       15 I thought of him.   For this cause I am to be awed at his pre-
        16 sence—I am to meditate on and be in dread of him.    It is the
           Lord indeed who hath softened my heart.    It is the Almighty
        17 who hath made me shudder.    For I had no knowledge of dark-
                                                                         —
     Ch. XXIV.                       JOB.
         ness coining upon me; and he had hid from my view thick
        darkness before me.
     XXIV.       But why have set times escaped the notice of the
         Lord; and the wicked transgressed all bounds; and ravaged
      3 both the flock and the shepherd ?     They have driven away the
         ass of the fatherless ; and taken the widow's cow for a pledge.
      4 They have turned the weak out of the right way ; and with one
         consent the meek of the land are hidden and are gone away
         like asses in a field.   They are sprung up above me in their
         own order.
      6     To one, bread is sweetened for his children ; others have
         reaped before dawn a field not their own—exhausted of
        strength have worked the vineyards of the wicked without
         wages and without food.
      7     They have caused many to sleep naked without covering
      8 they have stripped them of clothing necessary for life.      These
         are wet with the dew of the mountains : and having no shelter
         they cling to a rock.
      9     They have torn the orphan from the breast : and him who
         had fallen they have pressed down.
     10     They have by injustice caused some to be naked ; and rob-
         bed the hungry of their morsel.
     11     They have entrapped some unjustly in straits, and the path
         of justice they did not know.
     12     Some are expelled from the city and their own houses : and
         the soul of babes heave heavy groans.
     13     Now why hath he not called these to account while on
         earth? Though they did not acknowledge—though they did
         not know the way of justice ; did they not still go on in their
     14 courses?    And hath he who knew their works delivered them
         up to darkness ?   And will he be as a thief in the night ?
     15     When the eye of the adulterer watched for darkness; say-
         ing, No eye shall discover me—when he having put a mask
     16 on his face digged through houses in the dark : (during the
         day they had shut themselves up—they had no acquaintance
     17 with light) because the morning is to all these as the shadow
         of death—because the terror of the shadow of death should
     18 acknowledge them ; is it swift on the face of the water ?
            The portion of these on the earth should be cursed and
             vol. II.                       s
                                                                 —
          XXV. XXVI.                JOB.
      Oh.
         their plants exposed dry on the ground : for they plundered the
         sheaf of orphans.Now was such a one's sin brought to remem-
         brance ?
            Though he was dark as the darkness of night ; retribution
         should be made for what he hath done : and every wicked
         man should be broken ; like a tree which cannot be healed.
      21    Because lie did not treat the barren with tenderness, and
         had no compassion for a poor weak woman. But overthrew the
         helpless with wrath : therefore when lie riseth he should have
         no security for his own life : when sick, he should have no
         hopes of recovery : but should perish by his disorder.
      24    As his exaltation afflicted many : he should wither like
         mallows by heat : or like an ear of corn which fell of itself from
         the stalk.
      25    Now if this is not the case ; who can say I have spoken
         falsehoods : and set my words at naught ?
      XXV.      Hereupon Baldad the Sauchean answered and said,
       2    What ! Is there any apology, or fear with him ; who made
       3 the universe and is supreme? For let none suppose, because
         robbers have a respite ; that snares shall not come from him on
       4 any.  For how can a mortal be just before the Lord or any off-
       5 spring of woman make himself clean?  If he setteth the moon
         beside him, it shineth not : and the stars are not pure in his
       6 siffht.Grant then that man is rottenness and that the son of
         man is a worm.
      XXVI.      To this Job replied,
       2     Whom dost thou assist, or whom art thou going to help ?
          Is it not him, who hath mighty power and whose arm is
       3 strong ? For whom hast thou been acting as counsellor ?Is it
          not for him who hath all wisdom?  Whom art thou about to
        4 follow ?Is it not him, whose army is beyond compare ?For
          whom hast thou announced dictates?  And whose breath is it
        5 which proceeded from thee ?Are giants going to rise up from
          beneath the water and the places in its neighbourhood?The
          mansion of the dead is naked before him: and destruction
          hath no covering.
        7    He it is, who stretcheth out Boreas over empty space
        8 who suspendeth the earth upon nothing—who bindeth up
        9 water in his clouds ; and the cloud under it is not rent—who
                                                                                                                             ;
          Ch. XXVII.                                              JOB.
                taketh possession of the front of his throne and over it spread-
           10 eth his cloud.                  His decree had drawn a circle on the face of
          11 the water ; at the confines of light and darkness.                                        The pillars of
                heaven flutter and are struck with consternation at his rebuke.
          12 By his power he calmed the sea ; and by his knowledge the
          13 monster was overthrown.                            The bars of heaven were terrified
                at him ; and by a decree he doomed to death the apostate dra-
                gon.
          14          Behold these are parts of his ways. But let us hear the least
                breath of reason for him.                       As for the strength of his thunder ;
                who knoweth when he shall employ it ?
          XXVII.               Furthermore Job proceeded and by way of preface said,
             2         As God liveth, who hath thus condemned me ; even the
                Almighty whohath mademy life bitter: while I have the power
                 of breathing and the breath of God is in my nostrils ; my lips
                 shall not speak wickedness, nor shall my soul contrive mischief.
             5        Far be it from me to acknowledge you to be right ; for till
                I die, I will not give up mine innocence.                                 And for asserting my
                 righteousness I make no apology ; for I am not conscious to
                myself of having done amiss.
             7         Should not mine enemies then be as the overthrow of the
                 wicked?           And they who rise up against me as the destruction
                 of transgressors ?
             8        Now whatever hope a wicked man hath, that he persisteth
                 shall he who hath trusted in the Lord be indeed safe ?                                           Or will
                 God hear his prayer?                        Or when trouble cometh upon him,
                hath he any assurance before him ?                                 Or upon his calling, will
                 he hearken to him ?
           11          But now let me tell you what is by the hand of the Lord.
           12 What are from the Almighty I will not falsify.                                        Behold you all
                 know that you heap vanity on vanities, saying,
                       " This is the portion of a wicked man from the Lord : and
                 the possession of oppressors, which shall come to them from
           14 the Almighty.                   If their children be many they shall be for
                 slaughter ; and if they grow up to men, they shall be beggars.
           15 Those who are about him shall die by pestilence : and their
           16 widows none shall compassionate.                                  Though he heap up silver
                 as dust ; and store up gold as clay : the righteous shall take
           18 charge ofall these ; and men of truth shall enjoy his wealth. His
        Ch. XXVIII.                  JOB.
        19 house is gone like moths or like a cobweb.  He shall lie down
           rich but shall not continue so. He hath opened his eyes, and
        20 all is gone. Sorrows flowed in upon him like water.In a night
        21 a tempest swept him away.   A burning wind shall take him up
        22 and go he must. It shall blow him away out of his place. He will
           dash upon him and will not spare. Should he by flight flee from
           his hand, he will cause them to clap their hands at him and
           will hiss him out of his place."
        XXVIII.      There is indeed a place, from which silver is got;
         2 and a place from which gold is strained.  Iron indeed is made
           out of the earth, and brass is hewn from a quarry like stones.
         3 He hath assigned a station for darkness : but every boun-
           dary he assigned is diligently explored—stones, darkness and
           the shadow of death ; the channels of brooks choked up with
           sand : where to such as know not the right way ; strength is
         5 unavailing and they are removed from among men.     As for the
           earth out of which bread cometh; from underneath it something
           like fire hath been turned up. The stones thereof is the place
           of the sapphire.  And the dust thereof supplieth man with
         7 gold.  A path is explored which no bird knew ; and which the
           vulture's eye hath not seen—which the race of boasters have
         9 not travelled ; and over which the lion hath not stalked.One
           hath stretched forth his hand with a pick and hath over-
           turned mountains from the roots. Another hath broken through
           the whirlpools of rivers : and mine eye hath seen every pre-
           cious thing. Another hath laid bare the bottoms of rivers and
        12 given manifest proofs of his power.   But where is wisdom to
        13 be found ?  And where is the place of understanding ? A mor-
           tal knoweth not the way thereof; nor hath it indeed been found
        14 out by men.  The abyss said, It is not in me : and the sea said,
        15 It is not in me.  Would not one give for it all he hath got?
           But silver cannot be weighed as its price; nor can it be pur-
           chased with the gold of Sophir—with the precious onyx or the
        17 sapphire.  Gold and chrystal cannot equal it in value; nor can
           jewels of gold be a barter for it. Things above need not be
        18 mentioned : but prize thou wisdom above all things below.
        19 The topaz of Ethiopia cannot equal it in value : nor is it to be
        20 rated by pure gold.  But where can wisdom be found?      And
       21 where is the place of understanding ?It hath escaped the know-
                                                      !                                                                                            ——
            Ch. XXIX.                                                        JOB.
            22 ledge of every man ; and is hid from the birds of the air.                                                                        De-
           23 struction and death said, We have heard the fame of it.                                                                           God
           24 is perfectly acquainted with its way and knoweth its place.                                                                        For
                   he surveyeth the whole world ; and knoweth all on the earth
           25 all that he hath made—the weight of winds and the measures
                   of water.
           26             When he had made and seen and numbered them ; and
           27 also a way for the pealing thunder : then did he see it and de-
                  clare it : and having prepared and traced it, he said to man,
                  " Behold the worshipping of God is wisdom : and to abstain
                  from evil is understanding."
           XXIX.                     Job still further continued his speech, with this exor-
             2 dium,                !   that I were reinstated as in times past !                                                  As in the
             3 days of the months when God preserved me—when his lamp
                  shined over my head—when by his light I walked through
             4 darkness—when I was making my ways conspicuous—when
             5 God watched over my family—when I was thick set with
             6 branches, and my servants were around me—when my ways
                  abounded in butter, and my mountains flowed with milk
             7 when I walked early through the city; and a seat was set for
                  me in the streets
             8           The young when they saw me hid themselves ; and all the
             9 aged stood up.                        The nobles forbore talking and put their finger
           10 on their mouth.                           And while they who heard me were blessing
           11 me, their tongue cleaved to the roof of their mouth.                                                                         When
                  the ear heard me it blessed me ; and the eye when it saw me,
           12 turned aside : for I saved the poor from the hand of the migh-
           13 ty ; and assisted the orphan who had no helper.                                                                The blessing
                  of him who was perishing came upon me: and the mouth of
           14 the widow blessed me.                                     I put on righteousness and cloathed
           15 myself with justice as with a mantle.                                                    I was eyes to the blind
           16 and feet to the lame.                                  I was a father to those in distress ; and
           17 the cause which I knew not I searched out.                                                            And I broke the
                 jaws of the unrighteous; and plucked the prey from betwixt
                 their teeth.
          18             Therefore I said, My youth shall advance to old age.                                                                Like
          19 the stock of a palm, I shall live long.                                                     My root is spread out
                 by the water; and the dew will abide on my produce.                                                                          This
                 vain glory of mine shall attend me : my bow is directed by
                                                                                                                               :;:;
             Ch. XXX.                                             JOB.
             21 his hand.              They who heard me paid close attention ; and at my
             22 counsel they were silent.                          To my decree they added nothing,
             23 But were overjoyed when I spoke to them.                                              As the thirsty
             24 earth receiveth rain, so did they my speech.                                          If I smiled on
                   them they could scarce believe it.                            And the light of my coun-
             25 tenance was not lost.                      I chose their way and sat as chief, and
                   dwelt as a king among warriors—as one who comforteth the
                   afflicted.
             XXX.               But now the meanest have me in derision: now, those
                   undertake to admonish me ; whose fathers I held in contempt
               2 whom I did not think worthy the dogs of my flocks.                                             What in-
                   deed was the strength of their hands to me ?                                  Destruction would
                   have been lost upon them.                          By reason of want and famine it
                   was useless.            Already they were fleeing ineffectually from dis-
                   tress and misery—they were crouding round the samphire on
                   the sounding shore ; and feeding on sea weeds as their food
                   despicable and contemned and in want of every thing good,
                   they through extreme want were chewing even the roots of
                   trees.
               5         Against me thieves have risen up, whose habitations were
               7 the clefts of rocks.                   Amidst this tuneful choir, are to be heard
                   the brawls of them who lived under hedges.                                         A race of fools
                   and despicable wretches, whose name and honour are extin-
                   guished from the earth.
               9         But now I am become their song : and they have me for
                   their by-word : and have abhorred me and stood at a distance
                   and have not spared to spit in my face.
             11          Because he opened his quiver and afflicted me : therefore
                   they have cast off the restraint, which they were under at my
             12 presence.             At the right of their brood they have taken their
                   stand :       they have stretched out their foot ; and vindicated
              13 against me their destructive ways.                                  My ways are destroyed
                   for I am stript of my robe.
              14         With his darts he hath pierced me—he hath used me
                   at his pleasure.                I    am become loathsome by sorrows.                                   My
                   sorrows roll back upon me.                           My hope is gone like a breath,
              16 and like a cloud, my safety.                              And now my soul is melting
                   within me.
                                                                                                                                      ;
                 XXXI.                                             JOB.
        Ch.
                      Days of sorrow take hold of rue ; and at night ray bones
               are melted and my sinews are quite dissolved.
         18           With great force he took hold of my garment ; and girded
               me about like the collar of my vest.                                      Thou hast accounted me
         20 as dirt : and my portion is in dust and ashes.                                                 Though I have
               cried to thee, thou hearest me not : but they stood up and
               observed me ; and came upon me without mercy.
         22           Thou hast chastised me with a heavy hand; and placed
               me among sorrows ; and cast me away far from safety.                                                          For I
               know that death will destroy me : for earth is the house for
         24 every mortal.                    For          !   how I wish that I might lay violent
               hands on myself ; or beseech another to do this for me.
         25           As for me I indeed wept for every one in trouble ; and
         26 sighed, when I saw a man in distress.                                             But when I expected
         27 prosperity : behold days of affliction came upon me.                                                       My bow-
               els have boiled and could not rest : days of misery have
         28 prevented me.                      I have gone mourning without restraint ; and
         29 have stood in the congregation and cried.                                              I have been made a
         30 brother to jackals, and a companion to ostriches.                                                      My skin is
         31 become very black ; and my bones are burning with heat.                                                              My
               kithara is turned into mourning, and my song to wailing for
               myself.
         XXXI.                  I made a covenant with mine eyes, that I would not
           2 gaze on a virgin : yet what portion hath God dealt out from
               above ?           And what, alas ! the lasting portion on high ?                                               " De-
               struction is for the wicked and banishment for transgressors."
           4 Why will he not behold my way and number all my steps?
           5 Have I walked with scoffers or hath my foot hasted to deceit ?
           6 For I have been weighed in a just balance ; and the Lord
           7 knoweth mine integrity.                              If my foot hath deviated from the
               way or my heart gone astray after mine eyes; or if with my
           8 hands I have touched bribes : may I sow and others eat
               and let me have no root in the land.
           9          If my heart hath gone after another man's wife, or if I have
               lain in wait at her gates ; let my wife gratify another, and mine
         11 infant children be dishonoured.                                      For the defiling of another
         12 man's wife exciteth a fury of wrath not to be restrained.                                                           For
                it is a fire burning in all the limbs ; which will not go out, till
                it hath utterly consumed.
                                                                                                                    ;
                   XXXI.                                     JOB.
            Oh.
            13        If I have slighted the cause of my man servant or maid ser-
                 vant when they had a controversy with me, what shall I do
                 when the Lord maketh inquest?                          And when he visiteth, what
                 answer shall I make ?                Was not I formed in the womb as they
            16 were?          And were we not alike fashioned in the belly?                                    Far
                 from depriving the poor of what they had, or causing the heart
                 of a widow to fail ; if I have eaten my morsel alone, and have
                 not shared it with the orphan ; (for from my youth I as a father
                 nourished them, and was their guide from my mother's womb)
           19 If I have seen the naked perishing and have not clothed them
                 and if the poor have not blessed me, and their shoulders been
           21 warmed with the fleece of my lambs ; If I have raised a hand
                 against the fatherless, because I had around me greater sup-
                 port: may my shoulder bone be dislocated, and my arm bro-
                 ken at the elbow.              For the fear of the Lord restrained me, and
                 the burden of that I could not endure.
           24         If I have made gold my measure, or placed my confidence
                 in precious stones : or if I have exulted because my wealth
                 was great, or laid my hand on what was not counted out to
           26 me : or, (do we not see the refulgent sun sometimes eclipsed,
                 and the moon continually changing ? for it is not in them :) if
                 then my heart hath been secretly enticed, and I have laid my
                 hand on my mouth and kissed it ; let this be reckoned to me
                 as the greatest transgression, that I have lied in the presence
                 of the Lord, the Most High.
           29         If I have rejoiced at the downfal of mine enemies, and my
                heart hath said, Aha ! Let mine ear hear myself cursed, and let
                me be a by-word among the people, when I am afflicted.
           31         If my maid servants have often said,                              that we had some
                 of his flesh meat to eat ! while I was living luxuriously : (indeed
                the stranger lodged not in the street, and my door was open
           33 to every comer:) If when I sinned inadvertently, I concealed
                 my sin ; for I was not so awed by the multitude as not to men-
                 tion it before them—(Now if I had suffered a poor man to go
                 from my door with an empty lap, who could have heard me
                 with patience ?) And if I had not feared the hand of the Lord
                 I would have put on my shoulders the writing which I had
           37 against any one, and have acknowledged it as a crown : But if
                 I did not tear it in pieces and give it up, without taking any
                                                                   —;
         XXXII.                   JOB.
    Ch.
    38 thing from the debtor : if ever my ground hath cried out against
        me, and the furrows thereof joined in the complaint : if I have
        eaten alone the strength thereof without money, and by rapine
    40 caused the heart of the owner of the soil to grieve : let nettles
        spring up for me instead of wheat, and bramble bushes instead
        of barley.
    XXXII.       Here Job closed his speech, and his three friends
        ceased from making further reply to him ; for he was righteous
        in their sight.Then was kindled the wrath of Elius the son of
        Barachiel the Buzite, of the family of Earn, of the country of
        Ausitis. His wrath was kindled against Job to a high degree,
        because he had declared himself just before the Lord : And
        with the three friends he was very angry, because they were
        not able to answer Job's defence : though they had charged
        him with being wicked.
      4    Now Elius had waited to answer Job, because they were
        older than he.  But when he saw that there was no answer in
        the mouth of the three men, he was fired with indignation
        therefore Elius the son of Barachiel the Buzite taking up the
        argument, said,
           I indeed am young and you are old ; therefore I kept silence
      7 and was afraid to give my opinion.   For I said, Is it not age
        which speaketh ?   And by many years they have gained wis-
        dom.
      8    But there is a spirit in mortals ; and it is the inspiration of
      9 the Almighty which teacheth.   They who live longest are not
        the wisest, nor is the knowledge of judgment confined to the
     10 aged.  Wherefore I said, Hear me, and I will tell you what I
     11 know.   Listen attentive to my words, for I will speak in your
     12 hearing that you may examine them.     Even now I could wish
        to attend to you : but behold there is none who convicteth Job
     13 none of you who refuteth his arguments : that you might not
     14 say, We the Lord's advocates have found wisdom.     And you
        have left a man at liberty to use hereafter the same arguments.
     15     They were daunted.     They answered not again.     They
     16 have antiquated their own speeches.  I waited patiently: for I
        had not spoken.    Because they stopped and made no reply,
         therefore Elius interposing, saith, I will speak again, for I am
        full of words—for I am pained with a spirit within me—fur I
            VOL. II.                 T
                                                                                                                   ;
                  XXXIII.                                   JOB.
           Oh.
                 am like a vessel full of new wine, in fermentation, without vent
           20 or like the labouring bellows of a smith.                               I will speak that I
                 may have ease, by opening my lips.                         For I should not be awed
           22 by man : nor put to the blush because of a mortal.                                      For I am
                 not apt to admire persons.                     Will not worms devour them as
                 well as me.
           XXXIII.                Now therefore, Job, hear thou my words, and listen
             2 attentively to my speech ; for lo ! I have opened my mouth,
             3 and my tongue hath begun to speak.                               My words shall proceed
                 from a pure heart ; and the sentiments of my lips shall be pure.
             4 It is the divine spirit, which made me, even the inspiration of
             5 the Almighty, which teacheth me.                           If thou art able, give me an
             6 answer ; come to trial, and let us stand face to face.                                  Thou art
                 formed out of clay, and so am I : we are both made of the same
             7 material.          By the dread of me thou wilt not be terrified ; nor
             8 will this hand of mine be heavy on thee.                                Now thou hast said
                 in my hearing—I heard the sound of thy words : for thou
              9 saidst, " I am pure, I have not sinned ; I am irreprehensible,
                 for I have not transgressed.                    But he hath invented an accusa-
                 tion against me, and hath accounted me as an enemy.                                    He hath
            12 put my foot in a clog, and watched all my ways."                                        For how,
                 dost thou say, I am righteous, yet he hath not hearkened to
                 me.      For He, who is over mortals, is eternal.
            13         And dost thou say, Why in my trial, hath he not hearken-
            14 ed to me on every matter?                          For the Lord may have spoken
            15 once, and again.—In a dream, for instance, or in a nightly
                  vision : As when a dread horror falleth on men, during their
             16 slumbers on a bed ; then doth he open the understanding of
                  men.       With such appearances of terror he frighted them, to
                  turn man away from iniquity.
             17         Again he hath saved his body from a fall, and hath rescu-
             18 ed his soul from death ; and hath not suffered him to fall in
                  battle.
             19         Again he hath rebuked him with sickness on a bed, and
             20 benumbed all his bones; so that he cannot take any nourish-
             21 ment, (though his soul longeth for food) until his flesh become
             22 rotten, and he can show his bones bare.                               When his soul hath
                   come near to death, and his life near to the mansion of the
             23 dead, though there may be a thousand messengers of death,
     Oh. XXXIV.                   JOB.
         not one of them can mortally wound him.  If he determine in
     24 his heart to turn to the Lord, when he shall have shewn man
         his charge against him, and pointed out to him his folly, he
         will support him, that he may not fall to death, and renew his
        body like the plaistering on a wall, and will fill his bones with
        marrow ; and make his flesh soft like that of an infant, and re-
     26 store him to full strength among men.    And when he hath
         prayed to the Lord, and shall enjoy acceptable things, he will
         come with a cheerful countenance and with thanks: and ren-
     27 der justice to men.  Then will such a man blame himself, and
        say, What I have done !   He hath not chastened me, as my
     28 sins deserve ! Save my soul, that it may not go to destruction,
         and let my life see light.
     29     Behold in these three ways the Almighty doth all these
     30 things with man.    He hath indeed delivered my soul from
        death ; that in light my life may praise him.
     31     Listen attentively, Job, and hear me : keep silence that I
     32 may speak.   If thou hast any thing to say, answer me : speak ;
     33 for I wish thee to be justified.If not : hearken to me : keep
        silence and I will teach thee.
     XXXIY.       Then Elius proceeded and said,
      2     Hearken to me, ye wise men, and ye who have knowledge
      3 listen attentively.For the ear trieth words and the palate tast-
      4 eth meats.  Let us take upon us the right of judging : Let
      5 us  know among ourselves what is good.        For Job hath
      6 said, " I am righteous : the Lord hath removed from me
      7 the trial ; and hath disappointed me of my trial. My wound
      8 is grievous without transgression." What man is there like
        Job, who drinketh up scorning like water—who hath neither
        sinned, nor been guilty of impiety—nor associated with the
      9 workers of iniquity to walk with impious men?      For thou
         shouldst not say, There shall be no visitation of man.He shall
     10 indeed have a visitation from the Lord. Therefore hearken to
        me, ye who are wise in heart.Far be it from me to be profane
        before the Lord ;   or before the Almighty to disturb the
        course of justice.
     11     "But he should render to every man according to each
        one's work ; so that in his own paths every man may find
     12 him."  But dost thou think that the Lord will do improper
                                                                                                                              :
            Ch. XXXIV.                                           JOB.
                  things ?         Or will the Almighty who made the earth, pervert
            13 judgment ?               Now who is this maker of the world and of all the
            14 things therein ?                  For were it his pleasure to confine, and keep
                  to himself, the wind, all flesh would expire together ; and every
                  mortal would return to earth, of which they were formed.
            16          See that thou be not chastened.                            Hear these things ; listen
            17 attentively to the sound of words.                              Consider that he who hateth
                  iniquity ; and that he who destroyeth the wicked, being eternal,
                  is just.
            18          He is irreverent, who saith to a king, Thou transgressest
            19 to princes, you are acting impiously.                                Who hath no respect for
                  the person of an honourable man ; nor knoweth how to honour
            20 nobles by respecting their persons.                               " But it should be in vain
                  for them to cry or to entreat a man, for they behaved wicked-
            21 ly in turning aside the weak.                            For he is the observer of mens'
                  actions, and nothing that they do can escape his notice : nor
                  can there be a place, where the workers of iniquity can be
                  concealed." (a)
            23 (b) That he will not yet set himself against a man ; is because
                  the Lord superintended all in ways unsearchable                                                 glorious
                                                                                                              ;
                  and wonderful, not to be numbered.
            25        (a) " As he knoweth their works : he should bring on night
            26 and they should be humbled.                                But hath he extinguished the
                  wicked though they are visible before him ?                                          Because they
                  turned aside from the law of God and did not acknowledge
                  his judgments, when they cause the cry of the poor to ascend
            29 to him, he should hearken to the cry of the poor." (b) But when
                  he giveth rest, who shall call him to account ?                                  When he hideth
                  his face, who can see him ?                     Both against a nation, and against a
            30 man at the same time, he maketh a hypocritick man king ; be-
                  cause of the perverseness of a people.
            31          Because one saith to the Almighty, "I have taken, I will
            32 not again take a pledge : I will look beyond myself; do thou
                  shew me: If I have done iniquity, I will do so no more."
            33 Will he for thee punish that iniquity ?                                  Because thou must de-
                  ny—because thou must draw the conclusion, not I : therefore
                  speak what thou knowest.                        For they who are wise in heart will
                   say the same : and a wise man hath heard this word of mine.
            35           Job indeed hath not spoken with wisdom : his words are
                                                                                 —.:
      Ch. XXXV. XXXVI.                    JOB.
          not with understanding.       Therefore let Job learn and no more
          make reply like the foolish ; that we may not add to our trans-
          gressions.   For iniquity will be charged to our account ; if we
          multiply speeches before the Lord.
      XXXV.          Then Elius proceeded and said,
       2      What thinkest thou of this in thy pleading ?          Who art thou
          that thou shouldst say,
       3      "I am righteous before the Lord ?              Or wilt thou say,
          "What can I do if I sin?"
       4      I will answer thee and these three friends of thine.           Look
          up to yonder heaven and see ; and observe the clouds, how
       6 high above thee they are.        If thou hast sinned, what canst thou
          do ?  And if thou hast multiplied transgressions, what canst thou
       7 effect ?   If thou art righteous, what canst thou give him ?           Or
       8 will he receive any thing at thy hands ?           Thy wickedness may
          affect a man like thyself : and thy righteousness, a son of man
        9 On the account of a multitude, they who are falsely accused
          will scream : They will call aloud because of the arm of ma-
      ll) ny, but none said, AVhere is the God who made me ; who re-
      11 gulateth the watches of the night; who distinguisheth me from
      12 the beasts of the earth and from the birds of the air?              There
          let them scream.       He indeed may not hearken even at the
          abuse of bad men.
      13 (a) " Since it is not the Lord's desire to see improper things
          since he, the Almighty, is the observer of them who do injus-
      14 tice ; he should save me : " (b) but be judged before him. Can'st
       15 thou praise him as things are ? Because he doth not regard Job's
          anger ; and hath not severely animadverted on some offence
       16 therefore    Job vainly openeth his mouth; he loadeth his
          speeches with folly.
       XXXVI.          Then Elius proceeded further and said,
        2    Bear with me a little longer that I may teach thee : for I have
        3 still something further to say ; taking my knowledge from
           abroad and from my own works, I will speak righteous things
           with truth, without considering in an unjust manner things
        5 which are unjust.      Know then that the Lord, who is mighty in
           power and wisdom ; will not reject the innocent, nor save the
           wicked : and that he will administer justice to the oppressed.
        7 He will not withdraw his eyes from the righteous, but will seat
         8
            XXXVI.                        JOB.
       Oh.
           thein at last with kings on a throne and they shall be exalted.
         8 When they shall be bound with fetters or held with cords of
         9 affliction, he will shew them their works and their trans-
       10 gressions, that they bear.—But he will hearken to what is
           just, and hath ordered them to turn from iniquity.             If they
           hearken and serve ; they shall end their days in prosperity and
        12 their years in the enjoyment of things convenient.        But the im-
           pious he saveth not : because they would not know the Lord,
           and because, when they were admonished, they were disobe-
        L°> dient, the hypocrites in heart shall incur wrath : they will not
        14 cry because he bound them : Let their soul therefore perish in
           youth and their life be wounded by angels.           Because they af-
           flicted the weak and feeble, he will support the cause of the
           meek.
        16     Though the abyss from the mouth of an enemy—the over-
           flow of that from underneath hath deceived thee ; and thy ta-
           ble which was full of fatness hath fallen : yet the cause of the
        1  righteous shall not fail.     But there shall be wrath against the
           ungodly, on account of the wicked bribes which they re-
           ceived for injustice.
        19     Let not the earnest entreaty of the weak in distress turn
           aside thee and all those in the exercise of authority.          Do not
           spin out the night that crowds may come to their assistance.
           But be careful not to do improper things : for by such a con-
           duct thou wilt extricate thyself from distress.
        22     Behold the Almighty will strengthen with his strength :
           for who is powerful as he?        Or who can examine his works?
           Or who can say, He hath done unjust things ?
        24     Remember that his works are greater than what men have
           attempted.     Every man hath seen by himself how many mortals
           are wounded.
        26     Behold the Almighty is multifarious in operations beyond
           our comprehension.
               The number of his years are indeed infinite and by him
           the particles of rain can be counted.
        28      When they are collected into a cloud for rain, the heavens
           will pour down.      But when the clouds cast a shade over the
           dumb creation he impressed a care on beasts, and they know
           the order for going to bed.     At all these things is not thine un-
             —                                                 —;!
     Ch. XXXVII.                 JOB.
        derstanding confounded ? And is not thy heart starting from
        the body ?
     29    Xow though the outspread cloud be rushing together, to
        the whole extent of his pavilion, behold ! with a clap of thunder
        he will expand it over him. He hath indeed covered the out
        branchings of the sea !For with what he judgeth nations he
        can give food in abundance.
     32    When with his hands he hath covered the light, and hath
        given provisional orders concerning food ; the Lord will warn
        his friend that there is a portion also for injustice.Therefore
     XXXVII.       on the account of this my heart was troubled, and
        moved violently out of its place.
      2    Hear the report made by the fierce anger of the Lord
      3 when a threat shall proceed from his mouth ; as his dominion
        extendeth over all under heaven, and his light over the wings
      4 of the earth ; after it he will thunder with a voice—he will
        thunder with the voice of his indignation.(And should it not
        make a change in those men when he shall cause his voice to
      5 be heard?)  With his voice the Almighty will thunder to our
        astonishment ; for he hath done great things which we cannot
        comprehend ; issuing a command to snow, be thou on the
        earth
      6    When the tempest and storms of rain, under his command
      7 seal up against the hand of every man, that every man may
      8 know his own weakness—when the beasts have entered their
        coverts, and have gone to rest on their beds; sorrows issue
      9 forth from their chambers, and cold from its lofty summits
     10 which by the blast of the Almighty produce frost, and govern-
        eth the water as he pleaseth.
     11    But when a cloud covereth a man of his choice, his light
     12 can disperse the cloud : and he at his sovereign pleasure, can
        cause the revolving agents to return to their works.What
     13 things soever he giveth them in charge : these are ordered by
        him on the earth ; and whether they be for correction, or for
        the benefit of the earth ; or for mercy, he is to be found in them.
     14    Hearken, Job, to these things and stand instructed with
        regard to the power of the Lord.  We know that God hath
        disposed his works—that he hath made light out of darkness
        That he knoweth the different purposes of clouds, and the
                                                                                                           !
                 XXXVIII.                              JOB.
           Ch.
           17 miraculous fall of wicked men.                      Now thy cloathing is warm
               and there is peace in the land.                 With him are powerful cordials
                for inveterate disorders : what an appearance of an infusion
           19 Therefore teach me what we shall say to him.                            And let us re-
           20 frain from much speaking.                   Have I had a book or a scribe by
                me, that by stopping the man I could be silent ?
           21        Though the light is not visible to all, there is a brighten-
                ing in the heavens, like that which cometh in clouds from
           22 him.       From the north the clouds brighten like fulgent gold.
                For these things great is the glory and honour of the Almigh-
                ty.    As we cannot find another equal to him in majesty ; dost
                thou not think that he who judgeth righteously will hear ?
           24 Men therefore ought to fear him.                       They indeed who are wise
                in heart, will fear him.
           XXXVIII.               After Elius had finished his speech, the Lord
               from a whirlwind and clouds, said to Job,
            2        Who is this who is concealing counsel from me, and who
                hiding words in his heart thinketh to hide them from me ?
            3 Gird up thy loins like a man and I will question thee and an-
            4 swer thou me.             Where wast thou, when I laid the foundations
                of the earth?          And tell me, if thou hast understanding, who
                settled the measures of it ?             Dost thou know ?            Or who stretch-
            6 ed the line upon it?                To what are the hooks of it fastened?
            7 And who laid the corner stone thereof?                         When the stars were
            8 made, all my angels praised me with a loud voice.                                It was I
                who shut up the sea with gates, when it rushed eagerly from
            9 its mother's womb.              It was I who made a cloud its cloathing ;
           10 and thick darkness its swaddling bands.                            It was I who set
           11 bounds to it ; surrounded it with bars and gates ; and said to
                it, Thus far thou shalt come and no farther : but in thyself
           12 thy waves shall be spent.                  Was it in concert with thee that I
                ordered the morning light ; and that the day spring knew its
           13 appointed time to tinge the wings of the earth—to scare the
           14 wicked from it ?             Didst thou take clay of the earth and form
                an animal and place on the earth a creature endowed with
           15 speech ?         Hast thou withdrawn the light from the wicked, and
           16 broken in pieces the arms of the haughty?                              Hast thou gone
                to the head spring of the sea ; and walked in the footsteps of
           17 the abyss?           Are the gates of Hades opened to thee through
                                                                                                  ——
        Ch. XXXIX.                                 JOB.
             fear, and are the porters of Hades struck with awe at seeing
        18 thee ?       Hast thou informed thyself of the breadth of that under
        19 heaven ?        Tell me then what is the extent of it.                  In what coun-
            try doth light make its abode, and of what sort is the place of
        20 darkness?          If thou wouldst lead me to their borders, and if
        21 thou knewest their paths ; I would know that thou wast then
        22 born, and that the number of thy years is great.                            Hast thou
            gone to the treasuries of snow, or hast thou seen the treasuries
       23 of hail ?        xVre they stored up for thee, for a time of enemies
       24 for a day of battles and combat ?                   From what place doth hoar
            frost issue, or whence is the south wind scattered over the earth ?
       25 Who hath prepared a course for the tempest, and a way for im-
            petuous storms to water the ground, where there is not a man
            the desart where no man dwelleth—to saturate an untrodden,
            uninhabited land and cause the bud of the tender herb to spring ?
       28 Who is the father of rain, and who hath begotten the drops of
       29 dew?        From whose womb doth ice proceed, and who in the
            sky hath brought forth hail which descendeth like a shower ?
       31 Whohath struck with terror the face of the wicked?                           Dost thou
            know the band of Pleias, or hast thou opened the hedge of
       32 Orion ?        Canst thou cause Mazouroth to come forth in his sea-
       33 son, or drag out Hesperus by his hair ?                       Dost thou know the
            revolutions of heaven, or the things on earth corresponding to
       34 them ?        Canst thou summon a cloud with thy voice, and will
       35 it, with the trembling of a water si^out, answer thee ?                            Canst
           thou despatch thunders, that they may go, and will they say to
       36 thee, Here we are ?             Who hath given woman a skill in weav-
      37 ing, and a knowledge of the art of embroidering ?                            Who is it
           who numbereth the clouds with wisdom, and hath caused the
           heaven to incline to the earth, when the earth was poured
           out like dust, and when I have glued the very clod as for a
      39 stone ?        Wilt thou hunt the prey for lions, or satisfy the arjpe-
           tites of dragons ?         For they are trembling for fear in their dens,
      41 and lying in ambush in their coverts.                    Who hath provided food
           for the raven ?          For his young have cried to the Lord, wan-
           dering about in search of provisions.
      XXXIX.              Hast thou known the time of the rock-goat's deli-
        2 very, and watched the pangs of hinds in travail ?                           Hast thou
           numbered the months they go with young, and hast thou dis-
                vol. ii.                             i;
                                   JOB.
      Ch. XXXIX.
       3 missed their pangs?  Hast thou brought up their young, de-
       4 void of fear, and wilt thou dismiss their pangs also? Shall
          they cast off their young, and be encreased with a new progeny,
          and shall they go forth and no more return to them ?
        5    Who hath sent forth the wild ass free, and who hath loosed
        6 his bands ?As I made the desart his habitation, and the salt-
        7 ish soil his place of encampment ; he scorneth the crowds of a
        8 city, and regardeth not the clamours of a driver.The range
          of mountains he will consider as his pasture, and he searcheth
          after every thing green.
        9    Will the unicorn condescend to serve thee, or to go to rest
       10 at thy stall ?Canst thou bind his yoke with thongs, or will he
       11 draw thy furrows in the field ?Hast thou relied on him be-
       12 cause his strength is great ?Wilt thou leave thy labours to
          him, and trust that he will carry out thy seed, and bring home
          thy threshed grain ?
       13    Why is the wing of the ostrich that of the sportive ?For
       14 though it comprehendeth that of the stork and falcon, yet she
          will commit her eggs to the ground, and hatch them in the
       15 dust ; not remembering that the foot may crush, and wild
       16 beasts trample them. She hardened herself against her young,
       17 as if not her's ; she laboured in vain without fear ; because
          God had silenced wisdom in her.  But did he not impart to
       18 her some understanding ? At a suitable occasion she will rear
          herself aloft ; she will laugh to scorn the horse and his rider.
       19    Hast thou invested the horse with strength, and clothed his
          neck with terror ?When thou arrayedst him with armour didst
       21 thou inspire his dauntless breast with courage ?Pawing in the
          plain he swelleth with pride, and rusheth impetuous to the field.
       22 Meeting a king he meeteth him with scorn, and turneth not
       23 back for fear of the sword. On him the bow and the sword
          swell with pride; and his rage will cause the ground to vanish,
       24 nor will he believe till the trumpet sounds : but at the sound
          of the trumpet he saith, Aha, and snuffetk the battle from afar,
          with a bound and neighing.
       26    Hath the hawk by thy wisdom poised herself aloft with
          wings expanded, unmoved, surveying the regions of the south ?
       27    At thy command doth the eagle soar, and the vulture abide
       28 seated on its nest, on the high crag of a rock, and in secret,
          XL. XLI.                 JOB.
      Ch.
      29 and continuing there seek its food ?Its eyes take an extensive
         survey, and its young are besmeared with blood.   Wherever
         carcasses are, there are they suddenly found.
      XL. 15 But behold now the wild beasts around thee, which feed
      16 upon grass like cattle—behold that one in particular whose
         strength is in his loins, and whose power is in the navel of his
      17 belly. He hath raised his tail like a cypress, and his sinews are
      18 plaited together. His ribs are ribs of brass, and his back bone
      19 is molten iron ; he is a chief of the Lord's fashioning, made to
      20 be insulted by his angels only.When he went up to the crag-
         gy mountain, he gave joy to the four footed beasts in the vale.
      21 They go to rest under trees of every sort, by the papyrus, the
      22 reed and the bulrush : But by him large trees with branches,
      23 and the bushes of the field are overshadowed.  Should there
         come a flood he would not regard it ; he is confident the Jor-
      24 dan can roll into his mouth.Can one look steadily at him, can
         one craftily bore his nose ?
      XLI.     Canst thou draw out Dragon with a hook, or put a ban-
       2 dage round his nostrils ? Or canst thou fasten aring in his snout,
       3 or bore his lip for a jewel ?Will he speak to thee with entrea-
       4 ties—with soothing supplications ? Will he make a covenant
         with thee ?  And wilt thou take him for a perpetual servant ?
       5 Wilt thou play with him as with a bird, or bind him as a spar-
       6 row for a child ?Do the nations feed upon him, or the Phceni-
       7 cians divide him among them?     With their whole fleet they
         could not carry the first skin of his tail, nor his head in their
       8 fishing barks. Wilt thou lay thine hand on him, recollecting
       9 the battle made by his mouth ?Do not so again. Hast thou not
         seen him? Hastthounot beenamazedat what is said ofhim? Hast
      10 thou not been afraid that he was prepared against me ? But who
      11 is there, who hath risen up against me—or who can rise up against
      12 me and stand to it ? If the whole world is mine, I cannot be put
         to silence by him. On the account of his power one may pity
      13 his equal.  Who can strip off his outer robe, or who can come
      14 within the folds of his breast plate?Who can open the doors
      15 of his mouth ?  His teeth are encompassed with terror.  His
         scales are shields of brass; and his ligature, like a smyrite
      16 stone.  They are glued one to another, so that no air may pass
      17 through to him.   They are to adhere close to each other; they
                                                                                                          ;
          Ok. XLII.          XL.                       JOB.
          18 stick so close that they cannot be torn asunder.                          At his sneez-
               ing lightnings flash : and his eyes have the lustre of the morn-
          19 ing star.        Out of his mouth issue as it were burning lamps
          20 and flaky flames, in appearance, are belched out.                              From his
              nostrils issueth the smoke of a furnace, flaming with a fire of
          21 burning coals.           His animal life is glowing coals ; and a flame
         22 proceedeth out of his mouth.                      In his neck, strength maketh
          23 its abode ; and destruction runneth before him.                            The flesh of
              his body is glued together ; it is so abundant that he cannot
         24 be shaken.           His heart is hard as a stone, and firm as an im-
         25 moveable anvil.             When he turneth himself about, all the four
         26 footed beasts on the earth shrink with fear.                            Though spears
              oppose him, they effect nothing ; for with regard to the lance
         27 and the breast plate, he considereth iron as straw, and brass
         28 as rotten wood.             The bow of steel cannot wound him ; and
         29 stones from a sling he considereth as grass.                       Battering rams are
              accounted as stubble ; and he laugheth at the shock of eruptive
         30 fire.     His bed is sharp pointed obelisks ; and all the gold in
         31 the sea under him, is but as dirt.                  He causeth the deep to boil
              like a cauldron ; and considereth the sea as a pot of ointment.
         32 The deepest gulf of the sea he accounteth his captive ; and
         33 reckoneth the abyss itself as his parade.                      Upon the earth there
              is not his fellow; made to be insulted only by my angels.
         34 He beholdeth every thing that is high ; and he is king over all
              that are in the waters.
         XLII.          Then Job in reply, said to the Lord, I know that thou
              canst do all things, and that with thee nothing is impossible.
          2 Who indeed can conceal counsel from thee?                              Though he for-
          3 beareth to speak, can he think to hide it from thee ?                            But who
          4 will tell me those things which I did not know—those great
             and wonderful things which I did not understand.                               Hear me,
              O Lord, that I may speak.               And let me ask, and do thou teach
             me.
         XL. 6          Whereupon the Lord further said to Job from the
          7 cloud, No : but gird up thy loins like a man, and let me ques-
          8 tion thee ; and do thou answer me.                    Decline not the trial with
             me.      Dost thou think that I have spoken to thee for any other
          9 purpose, but that thou mayst appear justified ?                          Hast thou an
             arm to contend against the Lord, or dost thou thunder with a
           XL. XLII.                   JOB.
      Ch.
      10 voice against him ?    Assume then majesty and power, and array
      11 thyself with glory and excellence; and send forth angels in
      12 wrath, and humble every one who is insolent.       Extinguish also
         the haughty, and turn the wicked into instant corruption.
      13 Hide them in the earth together, and cover their faces with dis-
      14 honour.   Thenwill I confess that thine own right hand can save
       1 thee.   Then the Lord God addressing Job, said, Doth he de-
       2 cline a trial with the xllmighty ?    Surely he who commenceth
      XL. 3 a suit against God, should support it.       Whereupon Job, in
       4 reply, said to the Lord, Why should I continue the debate
         any further ?   I stand corrected for commencing a suit against
         the Lord.    On hearing such things, what answer can I, who
       5 am nothing, make to thee ?     I will lay my hand on my mouth.
         Once I have spoken, but I will not proceed a second time.
         I heard of thee before, with the hearing of the ear ; but now
         mine eye hath seen thee, therefore I abhor myself, and am ready
         to drop into dissolution, and account myself as dust and ashes.
     XLII.     7 Now after the Lord had spoken all these things to Job,
         the Lord said to Eliphaz, the Thaimanite, Thou hast sinned
         and thy two friends.     For you have not spoken any thing true
       8 before me, as my servant Job hath.      Now therefore take seven
         young bulls and seven rams, and go to my servant Job, and
         he will make an offering for you ; and my servant Job will pray
         for you.   For him only I will accept ; for were it not for his
         sake, I would destroy you, because you have not spoken what
         is true against my servant Job.
       9     So Eliphaz the Thaimanite, and Baldad the Sauchean, and
         Sophar the Minaian, went and did as the Lord commanded
         them, and he forgave them their sin for Job's sake.       And the
     10 Lord increased Job.       L^pon his making supplication for his
         friends, the Lord forgave them their sins, and the Lord gave
     11 Job twice as much as he had before.         When all his brethren
         and his sisters heard what had befallen him, they came to him,
         together with all those who were formerly acquainted with him,
         and having eaten and drank at his house, they comforted him,
         and expressed their amazement at all that the Lord had
         brought upon him.     And every one presented him a lamb, and
     12 a quarter of a drachm of gold bullion.      And the Lord blessed
         the latter days of Job more than the former ; so that his stock
            Oh. XLIL                                         JOB.
                 was fourteen thousand sheep, six thousand camels, a thousand
            13 yoke of oxen, a thousand breeding asses.                                And he had seven
            14 sons born to him, and three daughters, the eldest of whom he
                 called Hemera, and the second Kasia, and the third Amalthaia-
           15 keres.         And in all the land there were no women found so fair
                 as the daughters of Job.                 And their father gave them an inher-
           16 itance among their brothers.                      And Job lived after this affliction
                 a hundred and seventy years.                      So that all the years which he
                 lived were two hundred and forty.                           And Job saw his child-
                 ren and his children's children, to the fourth generation, and
           17 died an old man and full of days.                        And it is written that he will
                 rise again with them whom the Lord raiseth up.
                          This is translated out of a book in the Syrian language:
                      For he dwelt in the land of Ausitis, on the confines of Idumea
                      and Arabia.           His first name was Jobab, and having married
                      an Arabian woman, he had by her a son whose name was
                      Ennon.         Noiv he himself was a son of father Zare, one of
                      the sons of Esau, and his mother s name was Bosorra : so
                      that he was the fifth in descent from Abraham.                                  Now these
                      were the kings who reigned in Edom, over which country he
                      also bore rule.           The first was Balak, the son of Beor, and
                      the name of his city ivas Dannaba.                        And after Balak, Jobab,
                      ivho is called Job; and after him, Asom who was general
                                                                                        }
                      from the region of Thaimanitis ; and after him, Adad, son of
                      Barad, who smote Madiam in the plain of Moab; and the
                      name of his city was Gethaim.                     And the friends ivho came to
                      Job were Eliphaz, of the sons of Esau, the king of the
                       Thaimanites ; Baldad, the sovereign of the Sauclieans, and
                      Sojihar, the king of the Minaians.
                                                        PSALMS.
                                                               I.
                      HAPPY the man, who hath not walked by the counsel of
                 the wicked ; nor stood in the way of sinners ; nor sat in the seat
                 of the scornful.           His delight will be in the law of the Lord only.
              3 And on his laAv he will meditate day and night.                                  And he will
                 be like the tree planted by the streams of water, which will
                 yield its fruit in due season, and its fruit shall not fall un-
                                  PSALMS.
      4 timely.   In all that he doth he shall be prospered.  Not so the
         wicked ; not so.  They are like the chaff, which the wind dri-
      5 veth from the face of the earth.     Therefore the wicked shall
        not stand in judgment, nor sinners in the counsel of the right-
      6 eous.   For the Lord knoweth the way of the righteous : and
         the way of the ungodly shall perish.
                                      II.
            WHY did nations rage ? And tribes meditate vain things?
      2 The kings of the earth combined ; and the chiefs assembled
         together, against the Lord and against his Anointed, [saying]
      3     " Let us break their bands asunder and throw off from us
         their yoke."
      4     He who dwelleth in heaven will laugh them to scorn—the
       5 Lord will treat them with derision.  Then will he speak to them
       6 in his wrath and trouble them with his sore displeasure.    But
         as for me, by him I am appointed king on Sion his holy moun-
       7 tain.  I proclaim the decree of the Lord ; to me the Lord said,
       8    "Thou art my Son, this day I have begotten thee, Ask of
         me, and I will give thee nations for thine inheritance, and the
       9 uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. Thou shalt rule
         them with a rod of iron.   Thou shalt break them to pieces like
         a potter's vessel."
      10     Now therefore, O kings, be wise : Be instructed, all ye,
         who judge the earth.
      11     Serve the Lord with fear : and rejoice for him with trem-
      12 bling.  Keep fast hold of instruction ; the Lord may be angry
         and you may perish out of the right way.   When his anger sud-
         denly blazeth forth, happy are all they who have trusted in
         him.
                                      III.
        A Psalm by David, when he fled from the presence of his son
                                   Abessalom.
       1        LOKD! why have they who afflicted me multiplied ?
       2 Many are risen up against me.      Many say respecting my life,
         In this God of his he hath no safety.
                                           PSALMS.
          3      But thou,       Lord, art my protector ; rny glory, and the lift-
          4 er up of my head.          With my voice I cried to the Lord, and
             from his holy mount he heard me.              — awoke.
          5      I laid me down to rest and slept            I             Because the
          6 Lord will protect me, I will not be afraid of myriads of peo-
             ple—of them who are besetting me round about.
          7      Arise,      Lord ; save me,          my God ! Because thou hast
             smitten all them, who foolishly were mine enemies—hast
          8 broken the teeth of sinners : this deliverance is the Lord's : let
             thy blessing be upon thy people also.
                                               IV.
                 For the conclusion with jisalms.         An Ode hy David.
          1     WHEN I made my supplication ; my righteous God
            heard me : thou hast enlarged me in distress : be gracious to
            me and hear my prayer.
         2      Sons of men ! how long will you be stubborn ! why love
         3 ye vanity and seek falsehood ?           Know that the Lord hath made
            his holy one wonderful. The Lord will hearken to me when I cry
         4 to him. Are you provoked to wrath ? Do not therefore commit sin.
         5 What you say in your hearts be sorry for, on your beds.                 Offer
         (J a sacrifice of righteousness and trust in the Lord.              Many say,
            Who will shew us good things?              On us, Lord, is marked the
         7 light of thy countenance : thou hast put gladness in my heart.
         8 Because of the increase of their corn and wine and oil they
            are filled ; while I will lay me down in peace and sleep because
            thou,     Lord, hast only caused me to dwell in hope.
                                               V.
            For the conclusion, concerning her ivho obtaineth the inheri-
                                tance.   A Psalm hy David.
         1          LOBD, hear my words—attend to my cry.                    Listen to
         2 the sound of my prayer, my king and my God !                   For to thee,
               Lord, I will pray.
         3      In the morning thou shalt hear my voice : in the morning
            1 will wait on thee and look up.
                                  PSALMS.
       4     Because thou art not a God pleased with iniquity; there-
       5 fore he who is wicked cannot dwell near thee : nor shall trans-
         gressors continue in thy presence.
       6    Thou      Lord, hatest all the workers of iniquity : thou
         wilt destroy all them who speak lies—a bloody and deceitful
       7 man the Lord abhorreth.   As for me, I through thine abundant
         mercy, will go to thy house : I will worship before thy holy
         temple, in thy fear.
       8     Lead me,      Lord, in thy saving goodness : direct my
         way before thee, because of mine enemies—because there is
       9 no truth in their mouth.  Their heart is false ; their throat, an
         open sepulchre : with their tongue they practised deceit.
      10     Judge them,     God; let them fall for their devices: ac-
         cording to the multitude of their crimes cast them out ; be-
         cause they have provoked thee,   Lord.
      11     But let all, whose hope is in thee, rejoice.They shall ex-
         ult forever, and thou wilt dwell among them : and all who love
         thy name will glory in thee ; because thou wilt bless the right-
         eous.  Thou,     Lord, hast covered us as with armour of fa-
         vour.
                                     VI.
           For the conclusion, among Hymns for the eighth day.   A
                              Psalm by David.
       1     O LOKD, rebuke me not in thy wrath ; nor chasten me
         in thine anger.
       2     Pity me,   Lord, for I am weak.   Heal me,    Lord, for my
         bones are troubled.
       3     My soul is troubled exceedingly : but      Lord, for how
         long?
       4     Eeturn,    Lord ; deliver my soul : save me for thy mer-
         cy's sake.
       5     For in death none can make mention of thee.   In the man-
         sion of the dead, who can give thee thanks ?
       6     I am weary with my groaning.   Am I every night to bedew
         my bed and water my couch with my tears ?
              VOL. II.                x
                                                                                                                             ;
                                                            PSALMS.
              7         Mine eye is troubled with indignation : I am grown old
                  among all mine enemies.
              8         Away from me, all ye workers of iniquity.                                      For the Lord
              9 hath heard the voice of my weeping—the Lord hath heard my
                  supplication : the Lord hath received my petition.
            10          Let all mine enemies be shamed and greatly troubled.                                            Let
                 them be turned back and instantly put to shame.
                                                                 VII.
                    A Psalm by David which he sung to the Lord respecting
                                         the words of Chousi the Jeminite.
             1              LORD, my God, in thee I have put my trust : save me
             2 from all my persecutors and deliver me : perhaps he like a lion
                 may tear my soul ; if there be none to redeem—none to deliver.
             3              Lord, my God, if I have done this—if there be iniquity
             4 in my hands : if I have requited them evil who did me wrong
                 let me fall by mine enemies as a worthless man : let mine ene-
                 my pursue my soul and take it—let him tread down my life
                 to the earth and lay my honour in the dust.
             6         Arise,           Lord, in thine indignation : exalt thyself in the
                 borders of mine enemies.                         Awake,               Lord my God, in the
             7 judgment thou hast enjoined.                             And when the congregation of
                 the tribes encompass thee ; ascend thou on high above them :
             8 The Lord is the judge of the tribes ; judge me,                                                Lord, ac-
                 cording to my righteousness : and according to mine innocence
             9 be for me.             Let the wickedness of sinners be brought to an end.
                       Thou wilt indeed direct the righteous : thou art the God
           10 who searcheth hearts and reins.                              Eightful is my help from that
                 God who saveth the upright in heart.
           11          God, who is a judge just and powerful ; (though he is long
           12 suffering and doth not execute vengeance every day) will, un-
                 less you turn back, sharpen his sword.                                He hath bent his bow
           13 and made it ready : and hath fitted to it the instruments of
                 death—those flaming bolts of his which he hath forged.
           14          Behold this man hath travailed with injustice.                                  Heconceived
           15 mischief and brought forth iniquity : he hath digged a pit and
                 covered it : into the pit which he made he will fall : his mis-
                                                                    —
                                 PSALMS.
         chief will return on his own head—on his own head his injus-
         tice will come down.   I shall praise the Lord for his loving
         kindness.  I shall sing to the name of the Lord Most High.
                                   VIII.
       For the conclusion. For the wine presses.  A Psalm by David.
       1       LORD, our Lord, how thy name ought to be admired
         in all the earth, since thine excellence is exalted above the hea-
      2 vens !  From the mouth of babes and sucklings thou hast per-
         fected praise, on account of thine enemies—[on account] of
         destroying an enemy and a revenger.
      3     When I behold the heavens, the work of thy fingers—the
      4 moon and stars which thou hast established, what is man that
        thou shouldst be mindful of him, or a son of man that thou
      5 shouldst visit him !Thou madest him a little lower than angels,
      6 with glory and honour thou hast crowned him, and set him over
        the works of thy hands.   Thou hast put all things under his
      7 feet—flocks and herds of all sorts—also the beasts of the field
      8 the birds of the air, and fishes of the sea—whatever travel the
      9 paths of the seas.  O Lord, our Lord, how thy name ought to
        be admired in all the earth !
                                    IX.
       For the conclusion. On the mysteries of the Son.  A Psalm by
                                   David.
      1     I WILL praise thee,      Lord, with my whole heart, I will
        relate all thy wondrous works.  Let me be gladdened and re-
        joice in thee ; to thy name I will sing, O thou Most High.
        When this enemy of mine is turned back, at thy presence they
      4 shall faint and perish ; because thou hast maintained my right
        and my cause.
      5    Thou the righteous judge hast sat on the throne ; thou hast
        rebuked nations, and the wicked one is destroyed.   Thou hast
      6 blotted out their Name forever and ever.  The enemy's swords
        have utterly failed, and thou hast completely destroyed cities,
        the memorial of them with their din is gone.
              8                                                                                                                         ;
                                                                PSALMS.
              7          But the Lord will endure forever : he hath prepared his
              8 throne for judgment ; he will judge the world with rigkteous-
              9 ness—with rectitude he will judge tribes.                                               The Lord was a
            10 refuge for the distressed, a seasonable helper in adversity.                                                      Let
                  them who know thy name confide in thee ; For thou,                                                          Lord,
                  hast not forsaken them who seek thee.
            11           Sing to the Lord who dwelleth in Sion ; among the nations
            12 proclaim his designs, for in making inquisition for blood, he
                  had them in remembrance—he forgot not the prayer of the
                  distressed.
            13           Have mercy upon me, O Lord ! Behold my affliction, be-
                  cause of mine enemies, O thou who raisest me up from the gates
            14 of death, that I may proclaim all thy praises in the gates of
                  the daughter of Sion.                      Let me exult with joy for thy salvation.
            15           The nations were completely entrapped by the destruction
                  which they contrived; in the gin which they hid, their foot is
            16 caught.              The Lord is known by executing judgments ; by the
                  works of his own hands the sinner is taken.
                                                          A responsive Ode.
            17          LET the sinners be turned back to the mansion of the
                  dead—all the nations who forget God.
            1           For the poor shall not be quite forgotten—the expectation of
                  the needy shall never perish.
            19           Arise,           Lord, let not man prevail—let nations be judged
                  in thy presence.
            20           Appoint, O Lord, a legislator over them—let nations know
                   that they are men.
                                                                        X.
                         WHY, O Lord, hast thou stood at a distance —dost thou
                   overlook at proper occasions—in adversity ?
               2          When the wicked exulteth with pride, the poor is set on
                   fire—they are caught by the counsels which they devise.
               3          Because the sinner is praised for the desires of his soul
                   —therefore he who committeth injustice is blessed.
               4          The sinner hath greatly provoked the Lord—according to
                    his great anger will he not make inquisition ?
                                          — — !                 —           ———;
                                    PSALMS.
      5     God is not before his eyes—his ways are polluted on every
        occasion.
            Thy judgments are removed from his sight—shall he have
        a mastery over all his enemies ?
      6     For he said in his heart, I shall not he moved and I shall
        never be in adversity.
            Is not his mouth full of cursing, and bitterness and deceit ?
      8 —Under his tongue there is mischief and sorrow.
            He sat in secret places with the rich to slay the innocent
        His eyes are on the watch for the distressed.
      9     He lurketh in secret like a lion in his den—He lurketh to
        make a prey of the poor.
            To make a prey of the poor when he hath drawn him in
        in his net he will humble him.
    10      He will stoop and crouch at his tyrannising over the poor
    11 For he said in his heart God hath forgotten—He hath turned
        his face from ever seeing.
     12     Arise,    Lord God, let thy hand be lifted up—Forget not
        the oppressed.
     13     Why hath the wicked provoked God ?—For he said in
        his heart, He will not make inquisition.
     1-1    Thou seest (for thou observest mischief and wrath)—That
        they have delivered themselves into thy hands.
            To thee the poor hath committed himself—Thou art the
        helper of the fatherless.
     15     Break the arm of the sinful and malicious man.—Let his
        sin be sought out till no more can be found.
     16     Let the Lord reign for ever and ever
     17     Perish ye nations out of his land!       The Lord hath heark-
        ened to the desire of the oppressed.
            Thine ear hath attended to the preparation of their heart
     18 to administer justice to the fatherless and the weak
            That man may no longer continue his insolence in the
        land.
                                        XL
                   For the conclusion.    A Psalm by David.
      1      IN the Lord I have placed my confidence, how say ye to
         my soul, " away to the mountains as an ostrich.
                —
                                   PSALMS.
        2     For behold the sinners have bent a bow: they have provi-
           ded arrows for a quiver ; to shoot privily the upright in heart.
        3 For what thou didst build up, they have pulled down."
        4     Now what hath the righteous done?      The Lord is in his
           holy temple.  The Lord, whose throne is in heaven ; whose
           eyes look down on the needy ; whose eye lids examine the
        5 sons of men—the Lord examineth both the righteous and the
           wicked.  He then who loveth iniquity hateth his own soul.
        6 Upon the wicked he will rain snares.   Fire and brimstone and
          a tempestuous wind, shall be the portion of their cup.
        7     Because the Lord is righteous, therefore he loved righte-
          ousness ; his countenance beheld uprightness.
                                     XII.
          For the conclusion, for the eighth [day] A Psalm by David.
        1     SAVE me, O Lord ! for a holy one hath ceased ; for truths
        2 are scarce among the sons of men.    They spoke vanities one
          to another : their lips are deceitful, they spoke with a double
          heart.
        3     May the Lord destroy all deceitful lips ; and the tongue
        4 which speaketh swelling words—them who say, " We will
          magnify our tongue : our lips are our own : who is Lord
          over us ? "
        5     Because of the oppression of the poor; because of the
          groans of the needy ; now will I arise, saith the Lord ; I will
          set in safety and speak boldly.
        6     The oracles of the Lord are pure oracles—tried silver, clear
        7 of dross, seven times purified.  Thou,     Lord, wilt keep us
          and preserve us, from this generation, and forever.
        8     The wicked are walking about : thou, in thy sublimity,
          hast carefully observed the sons of men.
                                     XIII.
                    For the conclusion. A Psalm by David.
        1     HOW long,       Lord, wilt thou forget me?     For ever?
          How long wilt thou turn away thy face from me ?
                                                                                                               ;::!:
                                                   PSALMS.
        2        How long shall I revolve counsels in my mind, and sor-
           rows in my heart?                 For years?           How long shall mine enemy
           be exalted over me ?
        3        Look down, hearken to me, O Lord, my God.                                      Enlighten
       4 mine eyes, that I may not sleep unto death—lest mine enemy
           say, I have prevailed over him.                        They who afflict me will re-
           rejoice, if I be moved.
        5        As for me, I have trusted in thy mercy ; let my heart re-
           joice in thy salvation : I will sing to the Lord my benefactor
           and hymn to the name of the Lord Most High.
                                                       XIV.
                           For the conclusion.              A Psalm by David.
        1        THE fool said in his heart, There is no God.                              They are cor-
           rupt and by their works abominable : there is none who doeth
           good.       No not one.
        2        The Lord looked down from heaven on the children of
           men; to see if any had understanding or were seeking God.
        3 They had all gone aside, they were altogether become vile
            there is none who doeth good—no not one.                                Their throat is an
           open sepulchre : with their tongues they practised deceit : the
            poison of asps is under the lips of them whose mouth is full of
            cursing and bitterness : their feet are swift to shed blood
            destruction and misery are in their ways : and the way of
            peace they did not know : there is no fear of God before their
            eyes.
        4        Will they all continue senseless?                         They are going on in a
            course of iniquity : they are eating up my people as they do
        5 bread : they have not called on the Lord.                                  They were seized
            with terror, where there was no fear; because God was among
            a righteous generation.
        6        Have you despised the counsel of the poor; because his
            trust is in the Lord ?
        7             that he would for Sion's sake send deliverance to Israel
            When the Lord hath brought back the captives of his people
            Let Jacob rejoice and let Israel be glad.
                                                                                                                              ::
                                                             PSALMS.
                                                                  XV.
                                                     A Psalm by David.
              1             LOKD! who shall sojourn at thy tabernacle?                                          And who
                  shall dwell on thy holy mountain ?
              2         He who walketh blameless and worketh righteousness
              3 And who speaketh truth from his heart.                                    Who hath not deceiv-
                  ed with his tongue ; nor done evil to his neighbour ; nor taken
                  up a reproach against his neighbours.                                 In whose sight an evil
                  doer is contemned; but who honoureth them who fear the
              5 Lord : who sweareth to his neighbour ; and doth not violate
                  his engagements : who hath not lent his money on usury ; nor
                  taken bribes against the innocent.                             He whose practise is such,
                  shall never be moved.
                                                                 XVI.
                                   An inscription for a pillar.                       By David.
               1        PKESEEVE me,                          Lord: for in thee I have trusted.                              I
              2 said to the Lord, Thou art my Lord : thou hast no need of my
              3 goods.          By the hallowed things in this land of his he had mar-
                  vellously displayed all his designs.                                 Their infirmities were
                  multiplied : after these hallowed things they hastened.
               4        I will no more assemble their congregations for blood,
               5 nor make mention of their names with my lips. The Lord is the
                   portion of mine inheritance and of my cup : thou art he who re-
               6 storeth me mine inheritance.                         The lines have fallen to me in the
                   best places : for this inheritance of mine is the best for me.
               7         I will bless the Lord who hath given me understanding
               8 even now at night my reins have instructed me.                                               I saw the
                   Lord continually before me.                         Because he is at my right hand
               9 that I may not be moved ; therefore my heart was gladdened ;
                   and my tongue exulted with joy : moreover my flesh also will
             10 dwell in hope ; that thou wilt not leave my soul in the mansion
                   of the dead nor suffer thine Holy One to see corruption.
             11          Thou hast made known to me the ways of life: thou with
                   thy presence wilt fill me with joy.                           At thy right hand are plea-
                   sures for evermore.
       1                                                                                 ::;
                                          PSALMS.
                                            XVII.
                                   A Prayer of David.
       1      HEAKKEN,              Lord, to my justification; attend to my
          supplication: give ear to my prayer which is not made with
          feigned lips.
       2      Let my sentence come forth from thy presence : Let mine
          eyes behold righteous decisions.
       3      Thou hast proved my heart : thou hast watched me by
          night : thou hast tried me : and in me there was found no in-
          justice.
       4      That my mouth might not speak the works of these men
          I, because of the words of thy lips, kept rugged ways.
       5      Establish my footsteps in thy paths ; that my footsteps may
          not be moved.
       6      I have cried, because thou, O God, didst hear me: incline
       7 thine ear to me and hear my words.               Display marvellously thy
          mercies, O thou, who, with thy right hand, savest from adver-
       8 saries them who trust in thee.          Keep me as the apple of an eye
       9 with the cover of thy wings thou wilt shelter me from the face
     10 of the wicked who afflict me.            These enemies of mine beset my
     1    soul : they shut up their fat ; their mouth spoke proudly.                Hav-
         ing driven me out they now enclosed me.                  They set their eyes
     12 inclining to the ground.           They observed me, like a lion eager
         for prey, and like a young lion lurking in coverts.
     13       Arise,       Lord, prevent them and cause them to stumble.
         Deliver my soul from the wicked : wrest thy sword from thine
     14 enemies hand          Dismiss them,         Lord, from the land : disperse
         them in their life time.         Though their belly was filled with thy
         stores ; they glutted themselves with swine's flesh, and left the
         relicks for their children.
     15       But as for me, let me appear righteous before thee; let me
         be satisfied with a display of thy glory.
                                           XVIII.
                    For the conclusion.       By David the servant of the Lord
            who spake to the Lord the words of this Ode on the day when
              VOL. II.                         Y
                                    PSALMS.
              the Lord delivered him out of the hand of all his enemies, and
              out of the hand of Saul ; and he said,
        1     I WILL love thee,         Lord, my strength !    The Lord is
          my support, my refuge and my deliverer.      My God is my help-
          er, in him I will trust : my protector, the horn of my salvation
          and my defender.
        3     In songs of praise I will call on the Lord, and I shall be
          saved from mine enemies.
        4     The pangs of death encompassed me ; and floods of iniquity
        5 startled me.   The pangs of Hades surrounded me, and the
        6 snares of death were before me.    In my distress I called on the
          Lord, and to my God I raised my cry.       From his holy temple
          he heard my voice ; and my cry before him reached his ears.
        7     Then was the earth shaken : it trembled ; and the founda-
          tions of the hills were convulsed and shaken; because at mine
        8 enemies God was incensed.      A smoke ascended in his ire, and
          at his presence a fire flamed, by which coals were kindled to a
          glow.   And he bowed the heaven and came down, and darkness
       10 was under his feet.   He mounted on cherubs and flew—he flew
       11 on the wings of winds.      But he made darkness his covering,
       12 His tent around him was dark water in clouds of air.        At the
          flash of the lightning before him, the clouds burst.   Hail stones
       13 and coals of fire !  Then the Lord thundered from heaven, the
       14 Most High uttered his voice: He sent forth his bolts and scat-
          tered them : he multiplied his lightnings and confounded them.
       15 Then were seen the head springs of waters, and the foundations
           of the world were disclosed, at thy rebuke.         Lord—at the
       16 blowing of the blast of thine anger.       He sent from on high
       17 and took me—he took me to himself from many waters.             He
           will deliver me from my potent enemies; and from them who
       18 hate me ; because they are stronger than I.        They surprised
           me in the day of my distress ; but the Lord was my firm sup-
       19 port ; and brought me out to a large place.     He will deliver me
       20 because he delighted in me.     The Lord will reward me accord-
           ing to my righteousness, and recompense me according to the
       21 cleanness of my hands.     Because I have kept the ways of the
       22 Lord, and have not wickedly departed from my God—because
           all his judgments were before me, and his rules of rectitude
                               PSALMS.
    23 were not far from me ; therefore with him I shall be unble-
    24 mished, and I will guard myself from mine iniquity; and the
       Lord will reward me according to my righteousness, and ac-
    25 cording to the cleanness of my hands in his sight. With the
       merciful thou will shew thyself merciful, and with a harmless
    26 man thou wilt be harmless ; with a warrior thou wilt be a war-
    27 rior, and with the wily, thou wilt practise wiles.Because thou
       wilt save a dejected people ; therefore the eyes of the lofty
    28 thou wilt humble.  Because thou,    Lord, wilt light my lamp
    29 —thou,      my God, wilt enlighten my darkness—by thee
       therefore I shall be delivered from a roving band ; and by my
    30 God I shall overleap a wall.  As for my God, his way is spot-
       less—the oracles of the Lord are tried, he is the protector of all
    31 who trust in him.   For who is God, besides the Lord?    And
    32 who is God, save our God? It is thou,       God, who girdest
    33 me with strength, and hast made my way spotless—who mak-
       est my feet like those of a hind, and who steadiest me on high
    34 places ; who instructest my hands for battle, and hast made my
        arms like a bow of steel, and given me a defence for my safe-
    35 ty ; and thy right hand hath helped me, and thy discipline hath
        upheld me to the last : this discipline of thine will still teach
    36 me.   Thou hast enlarged my steps under me, and my tread
    37 was not unsteady.   I shall pursue mine enemies and overtake
    38 them, and not turn back till they are destroyed. I shall harass
        them that they may not be able to stand ; they shall fall down
    39 under my feet.  For thou hast girded me with strength for bat-
    40 tie, and subdued under me all that rose up against me.  Thou
        hast given me the backs of mine enemies, and utterly destroyed
     41 them who hate me.    They cried aloud, but there was no sa-
     42 viour—to the Lord, but he hearkened not to them.   So that I
        shall beat them small as dust before the wind, and trample them
        down like dirt in the street.
     43    Deliver me from the contentions of the people.  Thou wilt
        set me at the head of nations.
     44    A people whom I knew not, have served me.    Soon as they
        heard, they obeyed me.
     45     Strange children have paid me feigned obedience. Strange
        children became old and limped from their paths.
                                                          —                                                         ;
                                                         PSALMS.
            46         Live the Lord! and blessed be my God! and let the God
                 of my salvation be exalted
            47         The God who hath executed vengeance for me : and sub-
                 jected peoples under me—my deliverer from outrageous ene-
                 mies.
            48         From them who rise up against me, thou wilt lift me up
                   from the man of violence thou wilt deliver me.
            49         For this cause I will praise thee,                          Lord, among the na-
                 tions : And sing melodiously to thy name.
            50         He is magnifying the deliverances of his king, and shew-
                 ing mercy to his anointed—to David and his seed forever.
                                                            XIX.
                                 For the conclusion.              A Psalm by David.
              1        THE heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament
                 proclaimeth the work of his hands.
             2         Day to day pronounceth a decree ; and night to night pro-
                 claimeth knowledge.
              3        Are they not speeches and are they not words, of which
                 is not their utterance heard ?
             4         To every land their sound is gone forth : and their doc-
                 trines to the limits of the world.
             5         In the sun he placed his tabernacle.                       And he is like a bride-
                 groom coming forth from his chamber.                               He will rejoice as a
                 giant to run his course.
              6        His going forth is from the summit of heaven; and his
                 course is to the summit thereof, and from his heat none can
                 be hid.
              7        The law of the Lord is perfect, it restoreth souls: The tes-
                 timony of the Lord is faithful, it maketh infants wise.
             8         The statutes of the Lord are right, they rejoice the heart.
                 The commandment of the Lord is clear, it enlighteneth the
                 eyes.
              9        The fear of the Lord is pure, it endureth forever.                                      The
                 judgments of the Lord are true, they are justified for being so.
            10         They are more to be desired than gold, or many precious
                 stones ; and sweeter than honey or the honey comb.
                                                                               ;             :
                                                        PSALMS.
       11          These indeed thy servant keepeth ; for keeping them there
             is a great reward.
       12          Who can understand his errors?                                  Cleanse thou me from
       13 those of mine which are hid ; and for those of others, spare thy
             servant.         If they gain not a dominion over me : then shall I be
       14 spotless, and clean from great transgression.                                         And the words
             of my mouth and the meditations of my heart, will be continu-
             ally acceptable in thy sight—                              Lord, my helper and my re-
             deemer.
                                                              XX.
                                For the conclusion.               A Psalm by David.
         1         THE Lord hearken to thee in a day of distress !
             The name of the God of Jacob defend thee ;
         2         May he send thee help from the Sanctuary
             And assist thee out of Sion.
         3         May he remember all thy sacrifice
             And make thy whole burnt offerings fat.
         4         May he grant thee thy hearts desire :
             And fulfil all thy counsel.
         5         We will rejoice in thy salvation, and triumph in the name
             of our God.            May the Lord fulfil all thy petitions !
          6         Now I know that the Lord hath saved his anointed.                                             From
              his holy heaven he will hearken to him.                                    The salvation of his
              right hand is with power.
          7         Some boast of chariots and some of horses; but by the
              name of the Lord our God we shall be magnified.
          8         They were entangled and fell ; but we arose and were kept
              upright.
          9         O Lord, save the king, and hearken to us, when we invoke
              thee.
                                                             XXI.
                               For the conclusion.                 A Psalm by David.
          1              LOKD, in thy strength, the king will rejoice ; and exult
              greatly in thy salvation.
                                   PSALMS.
        2    Thou hast granted him the desire of his soul, and hast not
          denied him the request of his lips.
       3     For thou hast pre-engaged him with kind blessings.     Thou
          hast set on his head a crown of precious stones.
        4    He asked of thee life ; and thou hast given him length of
          days forever.
        5    By thy salvation his glory is great.     Thou wilt confer on
          him honour and majesty.
        6    For thou wilt give him everlasting blessing ; and with the
          joy of thy countenance make him glad.
        7    Because the king trusteth in the Lord : therefore, through
          the mercy of the Most High, he cannot be shaken.
        8    Let thine enemies feel thy hand : and thy right hand find out
          all that hate thee.
        9     Thou wilt make them like an oven of fire, at the time of
          thy presence.   The Lord with his wrath will confound them,
          and a fire shall devour them.
       10     Thou wilt destroy their fruit from the earth, and their seed
          from among the sons of men.
       11     Because on thee they were turning evils.     Were devising
       12 a counsel which they could not accomplish—because thou wilt
          set them behind those thou hast left—wilt prepare others to be
          before them.
       13     Be thou,     Lord, exalted by thy power: let us sing and
          extol thy acts of government.
                                     XXII.
       For the conclusion. On the help of the morning. A Psalm by David.
        1        GOD, my God! attend to me ! why hast thou forsaken
           me? have the acts of my transgressions [removed thee] far from
        2 saving me ?      my God, shall I cry to thee by day, and thou
        3 not listen, and by night, and thou not hear me ?    Thou indeed
        4 dwellest in a holy place ; thou art the praise of Israel.In thee
           our fathers placed their trust—they trusted and thou didst de-
        5 liver them.   To thee they cried and they were saved; in thee
           they trusted and were not put to shame.
         6    As for me, I am a worm, and no man—the scorn of men
                                —                                                                                ;::
                                                   PSALMS.
        7 and the people's contempt.                      All that see me have laughed me
            to scorn ; they said with their lips while they shaked their head,
        8 "He trusted in the Lord, let him deliver him ; let him save him,
        9 since he delighteth in him."                        Because thou art he, who drew
            me forth from the womb : my hope, when at the breasts of my
      10 mother—I was cast on thy care from my very birth—from my
      11 mother's womb thou art my God;                                    stand not at a distance
       12 from me ; for trouble is near—for there is no helper.                                         Many
            bulls have encompassed me—fat bulls have beset me around.
       13 Against me they have opened their mouth, like a ravening and
       14 roaring lion.             I am poured out like water, and all my bones
            are torn asunder: my heart within me is melted like wax.
       15 My strength is dried up like a potsherd, and my tongue cleav-
            eth to my palate—thou hast indeed brought me to the dust of
       16 death.         Because many dogs have encompassed me, an assem-
            bly of wicked men have beset me—have pierced my hands
       17 and my feet—have counted all my bones, and have stared
            and looked at me ; they have parted my garments among
            them, and for my vesture have cast lots; Therefore,                                          Lord,
       20 delay not thou my help, draw near to my assistance ; rescue
            my soul from the sword—this only begotten of mine from the
       21 paw of a dog.                 Save me from the mouth of a lion, and this
       22 lowliness of mine from the unicorn's horns.                                 I will declare thv
            name to my brethren : in the midst of a congregation I will
             sing praise to thee.
       23         Praise him, ye who fear the Lord praise him, all ye seed
       24 of Jacob.           Let all the seed of Israel fear him ; for he hath not
             slighted, nor abhorred the prayer of the distressed ; nor turn-
             ed away his face from me : but hearkened to me when I cried
       25 to him.           My praise shall be of thee in a great congregation
             I will pay my vows before them who fear him.
       26         The needy shall eat and be satisfied : and they who seek
             the Lord will praise him.                    Their heart shall be forever alive.
        27 All the ends of the earth shall remember and turn to the Lord
             and all the families of the nations shall worship before him
        28 for the kingdom is the Lord's and he ruleth the nations.                                         All
        29 the fat ones of the earth have eaten and worshipped : before him
             shall bow all that go down to the dust.                            Let my soul therefore
             live for him.
                                                                                                          ;
                                                   PSALMS.
          30        My seed indeed will serve hirn : a generation which is
          31 coming shall be announced for the Lord : and they will pro-
               claim his saving mercy to a people that shall be born, whom
               the Lord made.
                                                     XXIII.
                                            A Psalm by David.
            1       THE Lord is my shepherd, I shall want nothing.                                  In a
            3 verdant pasture he hath fixed my abode.                         He hath fed me by
               gently flowing water and restored my soul.                         He hath led me
            4 in paths of righteousness for his name's sake.                           For though I
               walk amidst the shades of death : I will fear no ills, because
               thou art with me ; thy rod and thy staff have been my com-
            5 fort.     Thou hast spread a table before me ; in the presence of
               them who afflict me.             With oil thou hast anointed my head;
            6 and thine exhilarating cup is the very best.                          Thy mercy will
               surely follow me all the days of my life; and my dwelling
               shall be in the house of the Lord to length of days.
                                                     XXIV.
                       A Psalm by David, on the first day of the week.
            1       THE earth is the Lord's and the fulness thereof, the world
            2 and all its inhabitants.             Upon the seas he laid its foundations
            3 and established it upon the floods.                      Who shall ascend to the
            4 hill of God, and who shall stand in his holy place ?                           He whose
               hands are clean and whose heart is pure.                          Who hath not de-
               voted his soul to vanity; nor sworn deceitfully to his neigh-
            5 bour.       Such shall receive a blessing from the Lord ; and boun-
            6 teous supplies from God his saviour.                       Such is the generation
               of them who seek him ; who seek the face of the God of Jacob.
            7 Open wide your gates, ye chiefs! and be opened wide, ye
            8 everlasting doors; that the glorious king may enter.                              Who is
               the glorious king?              The Lord strong and mighty: the Lord
            9 mighty in battle.             Open wide your gates, ye chiefs ; and be
               opened wide ye everlasting doors; that the glorious king may
                               !                                                                                           ;;:
                                                           PSALMS.
         10 enter.          Who is this glorious king ?                          The Lord of Hosts.                     He
               is the king of glory.
                                                              XXV.
                                                  A Psalm hy David.
           1         TO thee,               Lord, I have lifted up my soul : O my God,
               in thee I have put my trust : let me not be shamed, nor let
           3 mine enemies deride me ; for none who wait on thee should
               be put to shame.                Let them be shamed who vainly transgress.
           4        Lord, shew me thy ways and teach me thy j>aths.                                                 Lead
           5 me to thy truth, and teach me : for thou,                                          God, art my sa-
           6 viour, and for thee I have waited all the day long.                                                    Lord,
               remember thy compassion and thy tender mercies; for they
           7 are from everlasting.                      Remember not the sins and follies of
               my youth; according to thy mercy remember me,                                                       Lord,
           8 for thy goodness' sake.                       The Lord is gracious and righteous
           9 therefore he will instruct sinners in the way : he will guide
         10 the meek in judgment : he will teach the meek his ways.                                                    All
               the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth ; to them who seek
         11 his covenant and his testimonies.                                For the sake of thy name
               therefore,              Lord, pardon this sin of mine, for it is mani-
               fold—
         12          What man soever habitually feareth the Lord ; him He will
         13 instruct in the way he hath chosen ; his life shall be spent in
               the enjoyment of good things and his offspring shall inherit
         14 the land.             The Lord is the strength of them who fear him
         15 and it is his covenant to display it for them.                                          Mine eyes are
              continually towards the Lord ; because he can extricate my
         16 feet from the snare.                      Look down upon me and compassionate
         17 me ; for I am an only begotten, though distressed : the trou-
               bles of my heart are multiplied :                               deliver me from these my
         18 distresses.            Look on my humiliation and my trouble and for-
         19 give all my sins.                  View mine enemies, for they are multiplied
        20 and have hated me with unjust hatred.                                              preserve my soul
              and deliver me : let me not be shamed, because I have trusted
         21 in thee.           To me the innocent and the upright cleaved ; because
         22 I waited for thee, O Lord.                           God redeem Israel from all their
               afflictions
                     VOL. II.                                    z
                                                                                                          ;;
                                                   PSALMS.
                                                     XXYI.
                                                   By David.
            1       JUDGE me,              Lord, for I have walked in mine integrity
           2 and trusting in the Lord I should not be shaken.                                 Examine
           3 me,         Lord, and prove me : try my reins and my heart.                              Be-
               cause thy mercy is before mine eyes ; and I have delighted in
           4 thy truth : I did not sit with the council of vanity ; nor can I go
            5 with them who transgress : I hated the assembly of evil doers
            6 and with the ungodly I cannot sit.                       I will wash my hands in
            7 innocence and go round thine altar, O Lord : that I may hear
            8 thevoice ofpraise ; andtell all thy wonderous acts.                         Lord, I have
               loved the beauty of thy house ; and the place of the mansion of thy
            9 glory.      Destroy not my soul with the wicked nor my life with
          10 blood thirsty men ; in whose hands are iniquities ; and whose
          11 right hand is full of bribes.               As for me, I have walked in mine
          12 integrity : Eedeem me, and be merciful to me.                             My foot hath
               been stedfast in rectitude : in assemblies, I will bless thee, O
               Lord.
                                                    XXVII.
                            A Psalm of David before he was anointed.
            1       THE Lord is my light and my saviour.                       Whom shall I fear?
               The Lord is the defender of my life.                   Of whom shall I be afraid ?
            2 When evil doers approached me, to devour my flesh; they,
            3 who afflicted me, even mine enemies fainted and fell.                             Though
               a host be drawn up against me, my heart will not be dismay-
               ed ;    though war rise up against me, still I exercise hope.
            4 One favour I have asked of the Lord ; and this I will earnest-
               ly seek ; that I may dwell in the house of the Lord, all the
               days of my life—that I may contemplate the delight of the
            5 Lord ; and visit his temple.                Because in his pavilion he hid me,
               in the day of my calamities—in the secret of his tabernacle he
            6 covered me ; he set me upon a rock ; and now, behold ! he hath
               raised up my head against mine enemies : I have gone round
                and offered at his tent a sacrifice of thanksgiving : with musick
            7 vocal and instrumental I will praise the Lord.                           Hear,        Lord,
                my voice when I cry ; have mercy on me and hearken to me.
                                                                                                                                         :
                                                                 PSALMS.
             8 To thee my heart said, I have sought thy lace; thy face, O
             9 Lord, I will seek.                      Turn not away thy face from me ; withdraw
                 not in anger from thy servant.                                  Be thou my helper : leave me
           10 not, nor forsake me, O God, my saviour.                                              Since my father and
                 my mother have left me ; and the Lord hath taken me to him-
           11 self: instruct me in thy way and lead me in the right path, be-
           12 cause of mine enemies.                            Deliver me not up to the will of them
                  who are afflicting me.                       Because false witnesses have risen up
           13 against me and injustice hath belied itself; I am confident of
           14 seeing the goodness of the Lord, in the land of the living.                                                       Wait
                 for the Lord and be of good courage ; let thy heart be strength-
                 ened and wait for the Lord.
                                                                  XXVIII.
                                                        A Psalm of David.
             1          TO thee,                 Lord, I have cried : O my God, pass me not
                 by in silence.                Shouldst thou pass me by in silence : I shall be
             2 like them who go down to the pit.                                       Hear the sound of my sup-
                 plication, when I pray to thee—when I lift up my hands to thy
             3 holy temple.                  Draw not my soul in with sinners ; nor destroy
                 me with the workers of iniquity—with them who speak peace
             4 to their neighbours and harbour mischief in their hearts.
                 Give them according to their deeds; and according to the
                  wickedness of their devices.                              According to the works of their
             5 hands give them—retribute to them their deserts.                                                            Because
                  they did not regard the works of the Lord ; nor the operations
                  of his hands: thou wilt utterly destroy them and not build
             6 them up again.                     Blessed be the Lord, because he hath heard the
             7 voice of my prayer.                         The Lord is my helper and my protector
                  on him my heart relied, and I am helped.                                        My flesh also is reviv-
             8 ed, that with cheerfulness I may praise him.                                                The Lord is the
             9 strength of his people ; and the safeguard of his anointed.
                  save thy people and bless thine inheritance ; feed them also
                  and lift them up forever.
                                —                                                                                                                       ::
                                                                        PSALMS.
                                                                           XXIX.
                                A Psalm of David, at the exod of the tabernacle.
               1           OFFER to the Lord, ye children of God—offer to the Lord
                    the offspring of rams.                              Offer to the Lord glory and honour
               2 offer to the Lord, glory to his name.                                              Worship the Lord in his
               3 holy court.                   The voice of the Lord on the waters !                                                   The God
               4 of the glory thundered !                                  The Lord is over many waters.                                         The
                    voice of the Lord is with power : the voice of the Lord is with
               5 majesty.                The voice of the Lord rending the cedars !                                                   The Lord
               ()   will rend the cedars of Lebanon, and shatter them to pieces
                    as a young unicorn would a calf; so will the beloved [shatter]
               7 Lebanon itself.                          The voice of the Lord bursting through a
                    flame of fire !                  The voice of the Lord shaking the wilderness.
               8 The Lord will shake the wilderness of Kades.                                                                 The voice of
               9 the Lord collecting the hinds ; when he shall lay the forests
             10 bare.             When in his temple every one uttereth praise ; the Lord
                    will cause that which was deluged to be inhabited : and the
             11 Lord will sit enthroned king forever.                                                         The Lord will give
                    strength to his people ; the Lord will bless his people with
                    peace.
                                                                             XXX.
                  For the conclusion.                        The Psalm of an Ode at the dedication of
                                                                     David's house.
                1           I WILL extol thee,                                Lord, because thou hast upheld me,
                2 and hast not suffered mine enemies to rejoice over me.                                                                        Lord
                I]   my God, to thee I cried and thou didst heal me.                                                                    Thou,
                     Lord, hast brought my soul up out of Hades ; and saved me
                4 from among them who go down to the pit.                                                              sing to the Lord,
                     ye his saints ; and give thanks at the remembrance of his ho-
                5 liness.             Because at his wrath there is vexation; but in his fa-
                     vour, life ; in the evening weeping may pitch its tent ; and in
                6 the morning, joy.                           As for me, I, in my prosperity, said, I can
                7 never be moved : (To my comeliness, thou, Lord, in thy good
                     pleasure hadst added strength) but thou didst turn away thy
                8 face, and I was involved in trouble.                                                To thee,                 Lord, I cried
            1                                                                                                                ;
                                                          PSALMS.
           9 and to my God made supplication—what profit is there in my
              blood—by my going down to corruption?                                              Can dust cele-
         10 brate thy praise ; or can it proclaim thy truth ?                                     The Lord heard
         11 and compassionated me : the Lord became my helper.                                                      Thou
               didst turn my mourning into joy; thou didst rend in pieces
         12 my sackcloth and gird me with gladness, that my glory might
               sound thy praise ; and that I might not be absorpt in grief.
                   Lord, my God, to thee I will give thanks for evermore.
                                                            XXXI.
                    For the conclusion.                A Psalm hj David, on a surprise.
           1         IX thee,              Lord, I have trusted.                    Let me never be put to
               shame.         In thy saving mercy rescue me and deliver me—In-
           2 cline thine ear to me ! haste to deliver me.                                       Be thou to me a
           3 protecting God—a house of refuge to save me.                                             Because thou
               art my strength and my refuge ; thou therefore, for thy name's
           4 sake, wilt guide and nourish me : thou wilt extricate me from
               this snare ; which they have privily laid for me.                                      Because thou,
                    Lord, art my protector; into thy hands I will commit my
               spirit.       Thou,            Lord the God of truth hast redeemed me.
           6 Thou hatedst them who fruitlessly regard vanities; but I have
           7 trusted in the Lord.                      I will exult with joy and rejoice in thy
               mercy:          because thou hast looked on my humiliation—hast
           8 delivered my soul from these distresses—hast not shut me up
               into an enemy's hand—hast set my feet in a roomy place.
           9         Pity me,             Lord, for I am afflicted : with indignation mine
          10 eye was troubled—my soul and all within me.                                                Because my
               life was spent with grief, and my years with sighing—with af-
               fliction my strength was exhausted and my bones were trou-
          1     bled ;     among all mine enemies I became a reproach ; and to
                my neighbours especially, and to my acquaintance, a terror.
          12 They who saw me abroad fled from me; like a dead man out
                of mind I was quite forgotten : I became like a broken vessel.
          13 Because I heard the whispers of many who dwell around me;
                when they assembled together against me they consulted how
                to take my life ; but as for me, I put my trust in thee O Lord
          14 I said, Thou art my God ; in thy hands are my lots ; deliver
                                  PSALMS.
         ine from the baud of mine enemies, and from them who are
      16 persecuting me.   Let thy face shine upon thy servant : save me
      17 for thy mercy's sake.     Lord, let me not be shamed, because
         I have invoked thee.    Let the wicked be shamed and driven
      18 down to the mansion of the dead.    Let those deceitful lips be-
         come speechless, which speak injustice against the righteous
      19 with pride and contempt.     How great,     Lord, is the abun-
         dance of thy kindness, which thou hast laid up in store for them
         who fear thee—hast provided for them who trust in thee before
      20 the sons of men.   In the secret of thy presence thou wilt hide
         them from the trouble of men ; thou wilt shelter them in a pa-
      21 vilion from the strife of tongues. Blessed be the Lord, because
         he hath marvellously displayed his mercy in a city besieged.
      22 As for me, on my surprisal I said, I am cast far from thy pre-
         sence ; therefore thou,  Lord, didst hear the voice of my sup-
      23 plication when I cried to thee.      love the Lord, all ye his
         saints, for the Lord searcheth out truth, and retributeth largely
      24 to the insolent.  Take courage and let your hearts be strong,
         all ye whose trust is in the Lord.
                                   XXXII.
                         On understanding.  By David.
       1     HAPPY they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose
       2 sins are covered.  Happy the man, to whose account the Lord
       3 will not charge sin, and in whose mouth there is no guile.  Be-
         cause I kept silence, my bones were consumed; by reason of
       4 my crying all the live long day. Because day and night thy hand
         was heavy on me, I was reduced to misery by a piercing thorn. I
       5 acknowledged my sin and did not conceal mine iniquity. I said,
         Against myself I will confess mine iniquity to the Lord, there-
       6 upon thou didst forgive the wickedness of my heart.    For this
         every pious man should pray to thee in due time.   Moreover in
       7 a flood of many waters, are they not to draw near to him ?Thou
         art my refuge from affliction, which surroundeth me—my ju-
         bilee to redeem me from them who encompass me.
       8     Let me instruct thee and teach thee the way thou shouldst
       9 go. I will fix steadily mine eyes upon thee. Be not like a horse or
                                                                —;
                               PSALMS.
        a mule, which have no understanding, the mouths of which,
        when they come not to thee, thou must strain with a bridle or
     10 a cavesson. Many are the chastisements of the sinner; but
     11 mercy will encompass him who trusteth in the Lord. Kejoice
        in the Lord and exult ye righteous, and shout for joy all ye who
        are upright in heart.
                               XXXIII.
                               By David.
      1    KEJOICE ye righteous in the Lord : praise becometh the
      2 upright. Praise the Lord with the kithara—with the ten stringed
      3 psaltery sing praises to him.Sing to him a new song ; sing in
      4 harmonious and triumphant strains. For the word of the Lord
      5 is right, and all his works are true.He loveth mercy and judg-
      6 ment ; the earth is full of the mercy of the Lord.By the word
        of the Lord the heavens were established, and all their host by
      7 the breath of his mouth. He gathered as in a vessel the waters
      8 of the sea; he laid up the deeps in store houses.Let all the
        earth fear the Lord ; and all the inhabitants of the world stand
      9 in awe of him ; for he spake and they were brought into being
     10 he commanded and they were created. The Lord dissipateth the
        counsels of nations, and disannulleth the devices of peoples.He
     11 disannulleth also the counsels of chiefs.But the counsel of the
        Lord shall endure forever, the thoughts of his heart from gene-
     12 rations to generations.Happy is the nation, whose God is the
     13 Lord—the people, whom he hath chosen for his heritage. Out
        of heaven the Lord looked down ; he took a view of all the chil-
     14 dren of men.  He looked down from his fixed habitation on all
     15 the inhabitants of the earth.It is he alone who formed their
     16 hearts : he knoweth completely all their works.A king is not
     17 saved because of a numerous army : nor can a giant be saved
        by his abundant strength. A horse is a false thing for safety
     18 nor can he with all his power save himself.Behold the eyes of
        the Lord are on them who fear him—on them who confide in
     19 his mercy ; to deliver their souls from death ; and to nourish
     20 them in a famine.  Let our soul wait for the Lord ; because he
     21 is our helper and our protector.Because by him our heart can
                                                                                                                                                        ;:
                                                                          PSALMS.
                     be made glad, therefore iu his holy name we have trusted.
              22 Let thy mercy,                             Lord, be upon us as we have put our trust
                     in thee.
                                                                          XXXIV.
                  By David, -when he had changed his behaviour before Abimelech,
                                     and, being dismissed by him, had gone away.
                1           I WILL bless the Lord at all times ; his praise shall be con-
               2 tinually in my mouth.                                 Let my soul glory in the Lord : let the
                3 meek hear and be gladdened.                                                  magnify the Lord with me;
               4 and let us extol his name together.                                               I sought the Lord and he
               5 heard me ; and brought me safe out of all my sojourns.                                                                       Come
                    to him and be enlightened and your faces shall never be sha-
               6 med.              This afflicted man cried; and the Lord heard him; and
               7 saved him out of all his afflictions.                                           The angel of the Lord will
               8 encamp round them that fear him, and deliver them.                                                                             taste
                    and see that the Lord is good ! happy is the man, who trust-
               9 eth in him.                         fear the Lord all ye his saints ! for they who fear
             10 him have no want.                                Rich men have become poor and hungry
                    But they who seek the Lord shall not want any good thing.
             11            Come, ye children, hearken to me : and I will teach you the
             12 fear of the Lord.                           What man soever desireth life and loveth to
             13 see good days : keep thy tongue from evil ; and thy lips from
             14 speaking guile : depart from evil and do good ; seek peace and
             15 pursue it.                   The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous: and
             16 his ears are open to their prayer.                                           But the face of the Lord is
                    against them that do evil ; to destroy the remembrance of them
             17 from the earth.                        The righteous cried and the Lord heard them
            18 and delivered them out of all their afflictions.                                                                The Lord is
                    near to those of a contrite heart ; and will save them who are
             19 lowly in spirit.                        Many are the afflictions of the righteous ; but
            20 out of them all the Lord will deliver them.                                                    He keepeth all their
            21 bones, not one of them shall be broken.                                                    Wretched is the death
            22 of sinners ; yet they who hate what is just will transgress.                                                                     The
                    Lord will redeem the souls of his servants: and none will
                    transgress who trust in him.
                                        PSALMS.
                                         XXXV.
                                        B\j David.
        1      JUDGE them,           Lord, who do me wrong.          Fight against
        2 them who are at war with me.             Take hold of the shield and
        3 buckler ; and stand up in my defence.          Unsheath the sword and
        •istop my pursuers : say to my soul, I am thy safety.             Let them
          who seek my life be shamed and confounded : let them be
          turned back and put to shame ; who are devising evils against me.
        5 Let them be like dust before the wind, when the angel of the
        6 Lord is afflicting them.       Let their way be dark and slippery,
        7 when the angel of the Lord is pursuing them.           Seeing they have
          without cause, hid for me their destructive snare—have, with-
        8 out reason, reproached my soul ; let a snare, which they know
          not, come upon them, and the gin catch them, which they
          have hidden ; and by that very snare let them fall.
        9     But let my soul rejoice in the Lord, and be delighted with
      10 his salvation.     Let all my bones say,         Lord, who is like thee,
          who deliverest the afflicted from the hand of them who are
          stronger than he—the afflicted and needy from them who spoil
      11 him?      False witnesses having risen up against me, laid to my
      12 charge things which I knew not ; they returned me evil for good,
      13 even bereavement to my soul.           As for me, while they were rais-
          ing troubles against me I cloathed myself with sackcloth,
          and humbled my soul with fasting.             Though my prayer is to
      14 return into mine own bosom, as I would a friend, as I would
          an own brother, so did I endeavour to conciliate.              I humbled
      15 myself as one in mourning and deep sorrow.               But against me
          they rejoiced and gathered together; for me, scourges were
          collected and I did not know : they were split—and they had
      16 no compunction.        They tortured me—with scoffs they derided
          me; they gnashed their teeth at me.
      17         Lord, when wilt thou look down—rescue my soul from
      18 their malice.      This only begotten of mine, from lions.           I will
          render thee thanks in a great congregation; among a mighty
      19 people I will praise thee.         Over me, let not these, my bitter
          enemies, vainly rejoice ; who hate me without cause, and give
      20 assent with their eyes.       For to me indeed they spoke words of
              vol. II.                     a a
                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                  PSALMS.
             21 peace, while with wrath they were contriving plots.                                                    Then they
                   opened their month wide against me ; they said, Aha ! aha
                    our eyes have seen.
             22           Thou,            Lord, hast seen ; keep silence no longer.                                             Lord,
             23 stand not at a distance from me.                                         Arise,            Lord, and attend
                    to my trial,                   my God and my Lord, for my justification.
             24 Judge me,                       Lord, according to thy righteousness,                                             Lord
             25 my God ! and let them not rejoice over me.                                                 Let them not say
                    in their hearts, " Aha ! aha ! it is to our mind ; " nor let them
             26 say, We have swallowed him up.                                        Let them who rejoice at my
                    calamities be shamed, and confounded together; let them be
                    cloathed with shame and confusion, who magnify themselves
              27 against me.                  Let them who desire my justification, exult with
                    joy and be gladdened.                          Let them who wish the peace of thy
              28 servant, say continually, The Lord be magnified.                                                    So shall my
                    tongue speak of thy righteousness—of thy praise all the day
                    long.
                                                                    XXXVI.
                          For the conclusion.                   By David the servant of the Lord.
                1          THE transgressor, in order that he may sin, saith within him-
                2 self, "He hath, before his eyes, no fear of God's finding out
                    and hating his iniquity:" because, before him, he hath acted
                3 with deceit.                The words of his mouth are iniquity and deceit.
                4 He would not be wise to do good.                                    He contrived mischief on his
                    bed ; he persisted in every course which was not good, and did
                    not abhor wickedness.
                5               Lord, thy mercy is in the heavens, and thy truth reach-
                6 eth to the clouds.                      Thy saving goodness is like the mountains
                     of God, and thy judgments like the vasty deep.                                                        Thou, O
                7 Lord, preservest men and beasts.                                      As thou,              Lord, hast mul-
                     tiplied thy mercy : let the sons of men therefore trust in the
                8 shelter of thy wings.                        With the fatness of thy house they shall
                     be plentifully fed ; and thou wilt give them for drink, the full
                9 flowing stream of thy pleasures : for with thee there is a foun-
              10 tain of life, and by thy light we shall see light.                                                   Extend thy
                     mercy to them that know thee, and thy goodness to them who
        1
                                         PSALMS.
      11 are upright in heart.         Let not the foot of pride come against
      12 me, nor the hand of sinners shake me.               There all the workers
          of iniquity are fallen ! they were thrust out and could not stand.
                                         XXXVII.
                                         By David.
        1     FEET not because of evil doers : nor envy them who com-
        2 mit iniquity.      For like grass, they shall quickly wither : and
        3 like the tender herb, they shall quickly fall.          Trust in the Lord
          and exercise kindness ; dwell in the land aud thou shalt be fed
       4 with the riches thereof.          Indulge thyself with delight in the
        5 Lord, and he will give thee the desires of thy heart.              Lay open
          thy way before the Lord, and trust in him ; and he will accom-
        G plish—he will indeed bring forth thy righteousness like light,
        7 and thy judgment, as the noon day.           Submit thyself to the Lord,
          and supplicate him ; fret not at the man who prospereth in his
        8 way—at the man who committeth iniquity.                 Cease from anger
        9 and forsake wrath—be not fretted so as to do evil ; for they
          who do evil shall be cut off: but they who wait for the Lord
      10 shall inherit the land.       Yet a little while, and the sinner shall be
          no more ; though thou mayst seek his place, thou shalt not find
      1    it.  But the meek shall inherit the land, and delight themselves
      12 in the abundance of peace.            The sinner may watch the right-
       13 eous, and gnash his teeth at him ; but the Lord will laugh him
       14 to scorn, for he foreseeth that his day will come.             The sinners
           drew the sword—they bent their bow, to overthrow the afflict-
       15 ed and needy—to slay the upright in heart.                 Let their sword
           pierce their own heart ; and their bows be broken to shivers.
       16 Better is the little which a righteous man hath, than the abun-
       17 dant wealth of sinners.       For the arms of sinners shall be broken ;
       18 but the Lord supporteth the righteous.                The Lord knoweth
           the ways of the spotless ; and their inheritance shall last forever.
       19 In time of troubles they shall not be shamed, and in days of
       20 famine they shall be plentifully fed.          Because the sinners shall
           perish.    Therefore when the enemies of the Lord were exalted
           and glorified—they were flitting away like smoke, and vanish-
       21 ing.    The sinner borroweth and will not repay; but the right-
                                  PSALMS.
      22 eons sheweth mercy and giveth.     Hence they who bless him
         shall inherit the land ; but they who curse him shall be rooted
      23 out.  The steps of a man will be directed by the Lord, when
      24 he taketh delight in his way.   When he happeneth to fall, he
         shall not fall with violence ; for the Lord is a stay to his hand.
      25 I have been young and am now old, yet I have never seen the
      26 righteous utterly forsaken, nor his seed begging bread.    All
         the day long he is merciful and lendeth, and his seed shall be
      27 entitled to a blessing.Depart from evil and do good and dwell
      28 for evermore.  Because the Lord loveth judgment and will not
         forsake his saints; they shall be preserved forever. The spot-
         less shall be avenged, when the seed of the wicked shall be ut-
      29 terly cut off; the righteous shall inherit the land, and dwell
      30 therein forever.  The mouth of the righteous will speak wis-
      31 dom, and his tongue will talk of justice. The law of his God
      32 is in his heart, and his footsteps shall not slide.The sinner
      33 watcheth the righteous, and seeketh to kill him ; but the Lord
         will not leave him in his hand, nor suffer him to condemn him
      34 when he is judged.   Wait on the Lord and keep his way : and
         he will exalt thee to inherit the land.  When sinners are cut
      35 off, thou shalt see it. I have seen the wicked highly exalted,
      36 towering aloft like the cedars of Lebanon. Again I passed by,
         and lo ! he was gone.  Though I sought him, his place could
      37 not be found.  Preserve innocence and eye rectitude ; for there
      38 is a remnant for the man of peace.   But transgressors shall be
         cut off together—the remnants of the wicked shall be rooted
      39 out.  The safety of the righteous is from the Lord; and he is
      40 their protector in time of trouble. The Lord will help them
         and deliver them ; he will rescue them from sinners, and save
         them : because in him they have put their trust.
                                 XXXVIII.
                  A Psalm for remembrance, respecting rest.
       1       LOKD, rebuke me not in thy wrath ; nor chasten me in
       2 thine anger.  For in me thy shafts are deeply fixed—and on
       3 me thou hast heavily laid thy hand.   There is no soundness in
         my flesh because of thine anger—no rest to my bones, because
                                                                         —;
                                   PSALMS.
       4 of my sins.   Because mine iniquities mounted above my head ;
       5 like a heavy burden they were heavy on me.        The wounds, on
       6 account of my folly putrefied and became corrupt.        I was in
       7 misery and wholly bent down : all the longsome day I went
         mourning.    For my soul was rilled with illusions ; and there
       8 was no soundness in my flesh.     I was afflicted and exceedingly
       9 depressed : I roared because of the groans of my heart.      Now
      10 all my desire was before thee, and my groans were not
         hid from thee.  My heart panted, my strength failed me : and the
      11 light of mine eyes is no more with me.       My friends and my
         neighbours stood over against me : they drew near and stopt
      12 even my near relations stood aloof.      But they who seek my
         life pressed forward : and they who seek my ruin spake vani-
      13 ties.  All the day long they studied deceits.   As for me, I, as if
         deaf, did not hear : and like one dumb I opened not my mouth.
      14 I became indeed like a man who heareth not ; and in whose
      15 mouth there are no reproofs; for in thee,         Lord, I put my
      16 trust.  (Thou     Lord my God wilt hearken—) for I said, Per-
         haps mine enemies may rejoice over me : (Indeed when my
      17 feet slipped, they used swelling words against me) for I was
         prepared for stripes, and my sorrowful situation was conti-
      18 nually before me ; that I might declare mine iniquity, and ex-
      19 press my sorrow for my sin.      But as for mine enemies they
         live and are stronger than I : and they who hate me wrongful-
      20 ly are multiplied.   They who reward me evil for good, traduc-
     21 ed me : because I followed righteousness.      Forsake me not ut-
         terly,    Lord, my God : stand not at a distance from me.
      22 Draw near to my assistance,      Lord of my salvation.
                                    XXXIX.
             For the conclusion.  For Idithun.   An Oclc by David.
       1     I SAID, Let me watch my ways ; that I may not sin with
         my tongue.    I set a guard on my mouth ; when the sinner stood
       2 before me.    I was dumb and humbled and silent from good
       3 things ; and my grief was renewed.        My heart was warmed
         within me.    That by my meditation a fire might be kindled
       4 I spake with my tongue—Make known to me,               Lord mine
         end ; and the number of my days, what it is.    That I may know
                                                                                                                                                                                             ;
                                                                                          PSALMS.
                   5 what I lack of it.                                       Behold thou hast made my days old ; and
                         mine existence is as nothing before thee.                                                                       The universe—every
                   6 man living is vanity.                                           Man indeed walketh about as an image
                                                                                                                                                                                             ;
                         still he troubleth himself in vain.                                                                He heapeth up treasures
                   7 and knoweth not for whom he is to gather them.                                                                                                  Now then
                         what is my expectation ?                                              Is it not the Lord ?                                      In thee is my
                  S hope.                  Deliver me from all my transgressions.                                                                    Thou hast made
                   9 me the reproach of a fool : I was dumb and opened not my
                10 mouth : because thou art he who didst make me.                                                                                                     !   Eemove
                         thy scourges from me: by the blow of thy hand I fainted.
                11 With rebukes thou hast corrected man for iniquity; and
                        caused his life to waste like a spider.                                                                    Still every man troub-
                12 leth himself in vain.                                               Hearken,                          Lord, to my prayer: give
                         ear to my supplication : hold not thy peace at my tears : since
                         I am a sojourner in the land ; and a stranger as all my fathers
                10 were; O spare me that I may recover strength; before I go
                         hence and be no more.
                                                                                                 XL.
                                                  For the conclusion.                                   A Pscdm by David.
                    1             I WAITED patiently for the Lord and he attended to me
                   2 and heard my prayer : and brought me up from a horrible pit
                         and from miry clay ; and set my feet on a rock and directed
                   3 my steps, and put in my mouth a new song—a hymn to our
                         God.              Many will see and be struck with awe, and trust in the
                   4 Lord.                   Happy the man, whose hope is the name of the Lord,
                   5 and who hath not looked to vanities and lying fooleries.                                                                                                   Many
                         are thy wonders which thou,                                                            Lord my God, hast wrought;
                         and for thy thoughts there is none to be compared to thee.
                         I have declared and spoken.                                                     They are multiplied beyond com-
                   6 putation.                        Sacrifice and offerings thou didst not desire, but
                         preparedst for me a body; whole burnt offerings and offerings
                   7 for sin thou didst not require.                                                             Then I said, Behold I come
                   8 (in the volume of a book it is written respecting me) to per-
                         form,                 my God, thy will, I was determined, even that law of
                    9 thine, within my heart.                                              I have published the good news of thy
                         righteousness, in a great congregation.                                                                     Behold I will not re-
                 10 frain my lips ; thou,                                           Lord, knowest my righteousness.                                                           I have
       1
                                     PSALMS.
          not hid thy truth in my heart, but have mentioned thy salva-
          tion—I have not concealed thy mercy and thy truth from a
      1   great congregation.    Withhold not thou then,        Lord, thy ten-
          der mercies from me.      Thy mercy and thy truth have continu-
      12 ally upheld me.       Because evils without number encompassed
          me—mine iniquities had overtaken me, therefore, I was notable
          to look up ; they were multiplied above the hairs of my head,
          therefore my heart failed me.
      13      Be pleased,      Lord, to deliver me.        Lord, draw near to
      14 my assistance.     Let them who seek my life to destroy it, be
          shamed and confounded together.          Let them be turned back
      15 and shamed who wish me evil ; let those quickly bear their
       16 shame who say to me, Ha ! ha !          Let all who seek thee,
          Lord, rejoice and be glad for thee ; let them who love thy salva-
      17 tion say continually, The Lord be magnified !           As for me, I
          am distressed and needy, the Lord will care for me.         Thou art
          my helper and my protector,        my God, make no delay.
                                         XLI.
                     For the conchision.    A Psalm by David.
        1     HAPPY he who is considerate with regard to the distressed
        2 and needy ; in time of trouble the Lord will deliver him.         May
           the Lord preserve him and keep him alive, and make him hap-
           py in the land, and may he never deliver him into the hands of
        3 his enemy !    May the Lord support him on his bed of languish-
        4 ing ! thou hast made all his bed in this sickness of his.      I said,
           " Lord be merciful to me : heal my soul, for I have sinned
        5 against thee."    Mine enemies said wickedly of me, " When will
        6 he die and his name perish ? "      And if one came to see me, his
           heart spoke vainly.    He collected iniquity for himself ; he went
        7 abroad and spoke for that purpose.        All mine enemies spread
           whispers against me ; against me, they devised things hurtful
        8 to me.     They came to a wicked determination against me.
           "Now he is confined to his bed, let him never rise again."
        9 Kay, mine own familiar friend, in whom I trusted—who ate of
       10 my bread, lifted up his heel against me.          But thou, O Lord,
                                                                                                                    ;
                                                        PSALMS.
                 have compassion on me, and raise me up, that I may requite
            11 them.         By this, I know that thou hast delighted in me, because
            12 mine enemy hath not triumphed over me.                                 And for mine inno-
                 cence thou hast upheld me ; and established me before thee for-
            13 ever.        Blessed be the Lord, the God of Israel, from everlasting
                 to everlasting.           Amen. Amen.
                                                           XLII.
               For the conclusion.             On understanding.               For the sons of Korc.
             1        AS the hart panteth for fountains of water, so panteth my
             2 soul for thee,             God. My soul hath thirsted for the living God
             3 When shall I come and appear before God ?                                      My tears were
                 my food day and night, when they said to me continually,
                 Where is thy God? On recollecting these things, I have poured
                 out my soul by myself.
             4        Since I am to pass on, at the place of an awful tabernacle,
                 to the house of God, with a voice of joy and praise—with the
             5 acclamations of them who celebrate a festival : why art thou,
                     my soul, cast down ; and why disquietest thou me ?                                 Trust in
                 God, for I shall praise him : he is the health of my countenance.
             6 O my God, my soul within me was troubled ; therefore I will
                 remember thee, from the land of Jordan and Ermoneim, bor-
             7 dering on the little mountain.                        Deep calleth on deep to form
                 thy roaring cataracts; all thy meteors and thy billows passed
             8 over me.           By day the Lord will command his kindness, and in
                 the night he will make it manifest.                          Let there be with me a
             9 prayer to the God of my life.                         Let me say to God, Thou art
                 my helper.          Why hast thou forgotten me—why go I pensive
           10 because of mine enemy's oppression?                                When my bones were
                 bruised, mine enemies reproached me, by their saying to me
           11 every day, Where is thy God.                          Why art thou,               my soul, cast
                 down —and why disquietest thou me ?                                Trust in God, for I
                 shall praise him ; he is the health of my countenance and my
                 God.
                                                                                                                  ;
                                                    PSALMS.
                                                       XLITI.
                                             A Psalm by David.
         1        JUDGE ine,                God, and plead my cause against an ungod-
         2 ly nation : deliver me from an unjust and deceitful man.                                      Since
             thou,         God, art my strength, why hast thou cast me off?
             and why go I mourning, because of mine enemy's oppression ?
         3       send forth thy light and thy truth ; these have conducted me,
         4 and led me to thy holy mountain, and to thy tabernacles.                                         Let
             me go to the altar of God—to God, the joy of my youth.
         5 With a kithara, I will praise thee,                                 God, my God.               Why
             art thou,             my soul, cast down—and why disquietest thou
             me? Trust in God, for I shall praise him. My God is the health
             of my countenance.
                                                       XLIV.
                For the conclusion.             For the sons of Kore.                A Psalm for
                                                  Understanding.
          1        O God, we have heard with our ears—our fathers have
          2 told us the work which thou didst in the days of old.                                        When
             thy hand had extirpated nations, thou didst plant them : thou
          3 didst afflict nations and drive them out.                          For they took not pos-
              session of the land with their own sword : nor was it their own
              arm that saved them : but thy right hand and thine arm, and the
              light of thy countenance, because thou tookest pleasure in
          4 them.         Thou, who didst command the deliverances of Jacob
          5 even thou art my king and my God.                                  By thee we can push
              down our enemies, and through thy name, scorn them who rise
          6 up against us.              For in mine own bow I will not put trust, nor
          7 is it mine own sword that can save me.                             For thou hast saved us
              from our enemies, and hast put to shame them who hated us.
           8 In God let us boast, all the day long : and to thy name give
              thanks forever.
           9        And hast thou now cast us off and put us to shame, and
         10 wilt not go forth with our armies !                          Thou hast turned us back
               before our enemies ; and they who hate us have spoiled for
                    VOL. II.                                B b
          1                                                                       a;
                                        PSALMS.
        1   themselves.    Thou hast delivered us up as sheep, to be devour-
        12 ed, and hast scattered us among the nations.           Thou hast sold
            thy people for nought ; the shouts of victory gave no abun-
        13 dance.    Thou hast made us a reproach to our neighbours—
        14 scoff and derision to those around us.          Thou hast made us a
            by-word among the nations—a shaking of the head among
        15 the tribes.    All the day long, my confusion is before me, and
        16 the shame of my face hath covered me, because of a reproach-
            er's and a defamer's voice ; and by reason of an enemy and
        17 an avenger.     All these things have come upon us, though we
            have not forgotten thee—nor dealt falsely in thy covenant.
        18 Though our heart hath not turned back, yet thou hast turned
        19 our steps from thy way.      Because thou hast humbled us in the
            place of affliction, and covered us with the shadow of death ;
        20 Have we forgotten the name of our God—or have we stretched
        21 out our hands to a strange god ?      Will not God search out these
        22 things, for he knoweth the secrets of the heart ?         Since for thy
            sake we are killed all the day long, and accounted as sheep for
        23 slaughter : awake : why sleepest thou, O Lord ?         Arise and cast
        24 us not off forever.    Why turnest thou away thy face forgetting
        25 our distress and our affliction?       Because our soul is humbled
        26 to the dust, and our belly cleaveth to the ground ; arise        Lord
            come to our assistance and deliver us for the sake of thy name.
                                          XLV.
         For the conclusion.    Respecting them who arc to he changed.         For
          the sons of Korc.     An Ode for understanding.          Concerning the
          Beloved.
         1     MY heart hath indited a good word, I recite my perform-
            ances to the king.     My tongue is the pen of a ready writer.
         2 Thou art fairer than the sons of men : grace is poured out by
         3 thy lips ; for this cause God hath blessed thee forever.          Gird
         4 thy sword on thy thigh,         thou Mighty !      To thy comeliness
            and thy beauty give energy, and prosper and reign, for truth,
            meekness and justice's sake ; and let thine own right hand mar-
         5 vellously conduct thee.     Thine arrows are sharpened,        Mighty
            one, nations shall fall under thee ; they are in the heart of the
         1                                                                                                    —
                                                     PSzVLMS.
         6 king's enemies.               Thy throne,              God, is forever and ever ; the
         7 sceptre of thy kingdom is a sceptre of rectitude.                                    Thou didst
             love righteousness and hate iniquity, therefore God, thy God
         8 anointed thee with the oil of joy above thy associates.                                       There
             is myrrh and stacte and casia for thy garments—for the ivory
         9 state rooms from which kings' daughters gladdened thee.                                            In
             honour of thee the queen stood on thy right hand, arrayed in
        10 robes of gold and embroidery.                          Hear,        daughter, and behold,
             and incline thine ear, and forget thy people and thy father's
        1    house.       Because the king is enamoured of thy beauty—because
        12 he is thy Lord; when the daughters of Tyre bow down to him
             with gifts, the richest people of the land will supplicate thy fa-
        13 vour.        All this honour is for the daughter of the king of Hese-
             bon herself, she is surrounded with chain works of gold, and
       14 embroidery.              The virgins in her train shall be introduced to the
             king.       They who are related to her shall be introduced to thee.
        15 They shall be introduced with gladness and rejoicing—They
        16 shall be brought to the temple of the king.                                Instead of thy fa-
             thers, sons are born to thee ; these thou shalt make princes over
        17 all the land.            They shall cause thy name to be remembered in
             all ages, therefore nations shall praise thee forever.
                                                       XLVI.
       At the conclusion.             For the sons of Korc.                 A Psalm concerning hid-
                                                     den things.
          1        GOD is our refuge and strength ; our helper in the trou-
         2 bles which often befal us.                    Therefore we will not be dismayed,
             though the earth be shaken, and mountains be hurled to the
         3 midst of seas.             Their waters roared and were troubled.                            By his
         4 power the mountains were convulsed.                                 The swelling streams
             of this river gladden the city of God : the Most High hath hal-
         5 lowed his own dwelling : God is in the midst of it ; it cannot
         (J  be shaken ; God by his presence Avill support it.                                 The nations
             were troubled, kingdoms tottered ; he uttered his voice, the
         7 earth was shaken.                 The Lord of armies is with us ; our helper
         8 is the God of Jacob.                   Come and see the works of the Lord
         9 The wonders which he hath done on the earth : he is making
                                                                                                                   ;!
                                                       PSALMS.
               wars to cease to the ends of the earth.                         He will break the bow
               and shiver the lance, and shields he will utterly consume with
          10 fire.      Bestill and know that I am God : let me be exalted among
          11 the nations, let me be exalted in the earth.                            The Lord of armies
               is with us, our helper is the God of Jacob.
                                                        XLYIL
                        For the conclusion.             A Psalmfor the sons of Kore.
            1            CLAP your hands, all ye nations ; shout to God with a
            2 triumphant voice : for the Lord Most High is awful—a great
           3 king over all the earth.                  He hath subjected tribes to us, nations
           4 also under our feet.                He hath chosen for us his inheritance the
           5 excellency of Jacob which he loved.                            God ascended at the tri-
            (3 umphant shout—the Lord, at the trumpet's sounding.                                        O sing
               praises to our God ; sing praises.                        Sing praises to our king
            7 sing praises.           Since God is king of the whole earth ;                                 sing
            8 praises with understanding.                       God hath commenced his reign
            9 over the nations : God is seated on his holy throne.                                  The heads
               of families assembled with the God of Abraham.                                    Because the
               mighties of the land belong to God, they have been exceed-
               ingly exalted.
                                                        XLVIII.
               The Psalm of an Ode for the sons of Kore, on the second day
                                                      of the week.
            1        THE Lord is great and greatly to be praised ; in the city
            2 of our God—on his holy mountain.                              To the great joy of the
               whole earth, he is establishing firmly Sion's mountains.                                        On
            3 the sides to the north is the city of the great king.                                      God is
            4 known in its palaces, when he undertaketh its defence.                                    For lo
            5 the kings of the land assembled—they came together.                                       Having
               taken a view they were so astonished; they were frightened,
            6 they were shaken : a trembling seized them : pangs were there
            7 as of a woman in travail.                    With a tempestuous blast thou wilt
                dash to pieces the ships of Tarsish.                           As we have heard, so
            8 have we seen ; at the city of the Lord of armies— at the city
                                                                       —:
                                   PSALMS.
       9 of our God.    God hath established it forever.   We waited,
      10 God, for thy mercy, in the midst of thy people.    According to
         thy name,      God; so be thy praise to the ends of the earth.
      11 Thy right hand is full of righteousness.     Let mount Sion be
         gladdened : and let the daughters of Judea exult for joy ; be-
      12 cause of thy judgments,      Lord.  Go round Sion, and encom-
      13 pass it : make proclamation in the towers thereof; mark with
         attention its strength ; and take a distinct view of its palaces
      14 that you may tell another generation, that he is our God for-
         ever and ever.   He will tend us as a shepherd for evermore.
                                    XLIX.
              For the conclusion.  A Psalm for the sons of Kore.
       1     HEAE these things, all ye nations; listen attentively, all
         ye inhabitants of the world ! both ye of lowest rank, and heads
       3 of families ; both rich and poor together.     My mouth shall
         speak wisdom; and the meditation of my heart understand-
       4 ing.  I will incline mine ear to a parable : with a psaltery I will
       5 unfold my problem.     Why am I terrified in an evil clay ?  TJic
       6 iniquity at my heel will surround me.    Some put confidence in
         their power : and some boast of the abundance of their wealth.
       7 A brother is not redeemed.    Is a man to redeem himself ?   He
       8 cannot give to God an atonement for himself; and the price
       9 for the redemption of his life : Though he laboured for the
         age that he may live to the end.   Shall he therefore not see cor-
      10 ruption ?  When he seeth the wise dying ; together the foolish
         and senseless shall perish.  And they shall leave their wealth
      11 to others,  (a) But their graves shall be their houses forever
         their dwelling places to all generations.   On these parcels of
      12 earth, they have put their names,    (b) When a man, who is in
         honour, hath not understanding : he hath been compared to
      13 the brute beasts and is like them—this very way of theirs was
         to them a stumbling block; and after this shall it with their
      14 mouth be praised ?    They are pent up like sheep in the man-
         sion of the dead : death shall feed them and the early watches
         will rule over them : and that help of theirs from their glory,
      15 shall in the mansion of the dead become obsolete.      But God
          3                                                                                              —!
                                                   PSALMS.
              will redeem my soul from the power of that mansion when it
         16 receiveth me.            Fear not when a man groweth rich, nor when the
         17 glory of his house is increased. For when he dieth he can carry
              nothing away : nor will this glory of his descend with him.
         18 Because during this life his soul shall be blessed ; let him praise
         19 thee when thou doest him a benefit.                         He shall go to the gene-
         20 ration of his fathers ; he shall never see light.                          A man who is
              in honour and hath not understanding, hath been compared to
              the brute beasts, and is like them.
                                           A Psalm, for Asaph.
          1        THE God of gods, the Lord hath spoken, and summoned
          2 the earth from the rising to the setting of the sun.                            Out of Sion
          3 the perfection of his comeliness—God in full manifestation, even
              our God will come and will not keep silence.                          Before him a fire
          4 shall blaze; and around him shall be a mighty tempest.                                       He
              will call to the heaven above and to the earth, to judge his peo-
          5 pie.      (rather his saints together to him—them who are in cove-
          (j  nant with him touching sacrifices ; and let the heavens declare
          7 his righteousness.             " Because God is judge, hear,                     my people
              and I will speak to thee—                   Israel and I will testify to thee
          8 I am God, thy God I AM.                      I will not reprove thee for thy sa-
              crifices.    And as for thy whole burnt offerings which are con-
          9 tinually before me, I will not take young bulls from thy house,
         1    nor he-goats from thy folds.                  For all the beasts of the forests
         11 are mine, the cattle on the mountains, and the beeves.                                I claim
              all the birds of the air ; and to me belong the ripe fruits of the
         12 field.      If I were hungry, I would not tell thee ; for the world is
         1   mine and the fulness thereof.                  Do I eat the flesh of bulls ?                Or
         14 do I drink the blood of goats ?                    Sacrifice to God a sacrifice of
         15 praise, and pay thy vows to the Most High.                              Then call on me
              in the day of trouble; and I will deliver thee and thou shalt
         ] 6 praise me."         But to the sinner God said, " Why dost thou men-
         17 tion my judgments, or take my covenant in thy mouth? As for
              thee, thou hast hated instruction, and cast my words behind
         18 thy back. When thou sawest a thief, thou didst run with him
                                                                                                                                     ;
                                                               PSALMS.
          19 and bast been a partaker with adulterers.                                                 Thy mouth hath
                abounded in wickedness, and thy tongue hath framed deceits.
          20 Sitting down thou hast spoken against thy brother, and against
          21 thy mother's son, propagated falsehood.                                               These things thou
                hast done and I was silent.                             Thou unjustly didst suppose that
                I would be like thyself.                         I will reprove thee and set things in
          22 order before thee.                      Now then, consider this, ye who forget God ;
          23 lest he tear you in pieces and there be none to deliver.                                                           The
                sacrifice of praise will glorify me ; and this is the way in which
                I will shew him the salvation of God."
                                                                     LI.
         For the conclusion.                     A Psalm by David, when Nathan the prophet
                                 came to him after he had gone to Bersabe.
            1         HAVE mercy upon me,                                      God, according to thy great
                compassion : and according to the multitude of thy tender mer-
            2 cies blot out this my crime, wash me thoroughly from this ini-
           3 quity of mine ; and purify me from this my sin.                                                For I acknow-
                ledge my transgression; and my sin is continually before me.
           •±   Against thee especially I have sinned; and in thy sight done
                this evil.          So that thou must be justified in thine acts, and must
            5 overcome, when thou art judged.                                       For behold I was born in
           6 iniquity ; in sins my mother conceived me : for behold thou
                lovedst truth ; to me thou hadst manifested the obscure and
           7 hidden things of thy wisdom.                                  Sprinkle me with hyssop and I
                shall be purified ; wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow.
           8 Cause me to hear joy and gladness ; let the bones, which have
           9 been humbled, rejoice.                                Turn away thy face from my sins
         10 and blot out all mine iniquities.                                   Create in me,                   God, a pure
         11 heart; and renew a right spirit within me.                                              Cast me not away
         12 from thy presence, and take not thy holy spirit from me.                                                            Ke-
                store to me the joy of thy salvation ; and support me with a be-
         13 coming spirit, that I may teach transgressors thy ways, and
         14 sinners may turn to thee.                                 Deliver me from blood guiltiness,
                     God, the God of my salvation !                                That my tongue may with
         15 joy proclaim thy forgiving mercy.                                           Lord, open my lips, that
         16 my mouth may proclaim thy praise.                                          Hadst thou desired sacri-
                fice, I would have given it.                          In whole burnt offerings thou wilt
                                 PSALMS.
       17 not take delight.The sacrifice for God is a contrite spirit.A
          broken and an humble heart, thou,    God, wilt not despise.
       18 Deal favourably, O Lord, in thy good pleasure, with Sion.
       19 And let the walls of Jerusalem be builded.Then wilt thou be
          pleased with a sacrifice of righteousness as an offering, and on
          thine altar young bulls shall then be offered up as whole burnt
          offerings.
                                   LII.
        For the conclusion.On understanding. By David, when Dock the
          Idumean came and told Saul and said to him, David went to Abi-
          melech's house.
        1    WHY boastest thou in mischief,    mighty man of iniqui-
        2 ty ? All the day long he devised injustice. Thy tongue is like a
        3 sharp razor : thou hast practised deceit.Thou hast loved evil
        4 more than good—lyingmore than speaking thetruth. Thou hast
          loved all the decrees of destruction—a tongue practised in de-
        5 ceit.For this cause God will utterly destroy thee—tear thee up
          and hurl thee from thy dwelling ; even thy rooted stock out
        6 of the land of the living.The righteous will see indeed and
        7 be afraid.And they will laugh at him and say, Behold the man
          who made not God his strength : and trusted in the abundance
        8 of his wealth ; and strengthened himself in his vanity !As for
          me, I shall be like a fruitful olive tree in the house of God.I
          have trusted in the mercy of God for this age and for the age
        9 of the ages. I will praise thee for this age because thou hast
          made it ; and wait for thy name, because it is good in the sight
          of thy saints.
                                   LIIL
        For the conclusion.Upon Maelath. Of understanding. By David.
        1    THE fool said in his heart, There is no God. They have
          corrupted themselves and are become abominable by iniquities,
        2 there is none who doeth good. God looked down from heaven
          on the children of men to see if any had understanding or were
        3 seeking God.  They had all turned aside : they are all together
        4 become vile. There is none doing good : no not one.They will
                                                                                                                  !
                                                      PSALMS.
              not bethink themselves, they are all working iniquity, they are
              eating up my people as they do bread?                               They have not called
           5 upon God.             They were seized with terror on the spot where
              there was no fear ; because God had scattered the bones of
              men pleasers.            They were put to shame because God despised
           6 them.         O that he would for Sion's sake grant safety to Israel
              When the Lord hath brought back the captivity of his people
              Jacob will rejoice and Israel will be glad.
                                                          LIV.
          For the conclusion.                Among the Hymns on understanding.                                By
              David, when the Ziphites came and said to Saul, Behold is not
              David hid among us.
           1        SAVE me,                God, by thy name; and judge me by thy
          2 power.              God, hearken to my prayer.                      Give ear to the words
          3 of my mouth.                For strangers have risen up against me ; and
              men of power have sought my life.                             They have not set God
          4 before them.             Behold God is my helper.                     The Lord is the pro-
          5 tector of my life.               He will turn these evils on mine enemies.
           6 Destroy thou them in thy truth.                        With free will offerings I will
              sacrifice to thee :           I will praise thy name,                       Lord ; for it is
          7 good : because thou hast delivered me from all affliction ; and
              among mine enemies mine eye hath looked on.
                                                           LV.
                For the conclusion.              Among the Hymns on understanding.
                                                     By David.
          1         GIVE ear,               God, to my prayer ; and overlook not my
          2 supplication.            Attend to me and hear me.                      I have mourned in
          3 my meditation and am troubled : because of the voice of an
              enemy and because of the oppression of a sinner.                                        Because
              upon me they cast iniquity and boiled with malice against
          4 me ; my heart within me was troubled ; and the terror of death
          5 fell upon me.              Fear and trembling came against me ; and a
          6 dark gloom overwhelmed me.                           So that I said,                 that I had
                   vol. it.                                C c
                                PSALMS.
         wings like those of a dove; that I might fly away and be at
       7 rest. Behold I had removed far away, as a fugitive, and taken
       8 up my lodging in the wilderness. I waited for him who deli-
       9 vereth me from distress and a furious tempest.Confound, O
         Lord, and divide their tongues, For I saw iniquity and con-
      10 tradiction in the city.Day and night shall transgression go
         round it on its walls and trouble be in the midst of it, and in-
      11 justice ? Usury and, fraud have not departed from its streets.
      12 Had an enemy reproached me I could have borne it.And had
         the man who hated me magnified himself against me, I could
       13 have hid myself from him. But thou,  man, my second self,
      14 my guide, mine intimate friend ! Who being with me didst
          sweeten my repasts !In the house of God, Ave walked in una-
      15 nimity—Let death come upon them ; Let them go down alive
          to the mansion of the dead : because there was wickedness in
       16 their dwellings—in the midst of them.As for me, I cried to
       17 God, and the Lord heard me.    Evening and morning and
          at noon I will declare and proclaim ; and he will hearken to my
       18 voice.He will deliver my soul in peace from them who come
       19 near me. Because they among many were with me ; God who
          existeth before the ages will hear and afflict them.For there is
      20 no redemption for them.  They indeed did not fear God : he
         hath stretched forth his hand with retribution.They profaned
      21 and broke his covenant : they were scattered by the indigna-
          tion of his countenance.When his heart was near, his words
       22 were smoother than oil.Now they are daggers.Cast thy care
          on the Lord, and he will sustain thee.He will never suffer the
       23 righteous to be shaken. But thou, O God, wilt drag them
          down to the pit of destruction.Bloody and deceitful men shall
          not live half their days.But as for me I will trust in thee,
          Lord.
                                  LYI.
        For the conclusion.For people far removed from the Holies.By
          David for a monumental inscription, when the Philistines had
          him in their power at Geth.
        1    PITY me,   God, for a man hath trodden me down. Fight-
        2 ing all the day long he hath afflicted me.Mine enemies have
                                                                                     —                                                 :;;.
                                                               PSALMS.
                trodden me down the whole day, with the day in their favour.
           3 Because they who fight against me are many, let them be con-
           4 founded.               But let me trust in thee : to God let me commend
                my words.              In God I have trusted all the day long : I will not
            5 fear what flesh can do to me.                                  All the day long they spurned
                my words: all their thoughts were against me for mischief.
            6 Some are to dwell near and hide themselves : some are to
            7 watch my footsteps.                        As I have suffered this for my life, thou
                wilt on no account save them.                                 In thine indignation thou wilt
            8 cast down peoples.                              God, to thee I have unfolded my life
                thou hast placed my tears before thee.                                        According to thy pro-
            9 mise mine enemies shall turn back ; on the day when I invoke
          10 thee.            Behold I know that thou art my God.                                          For God let me
                approve the decree : for the Lord let me approve the word.
          11 In God I have put my trust; I will not fear what man can do
          12 to me.                On me,                 God, are the vows of thy praise, which
          13 I will pay : because thou hast delivered my soul from death
                 and my feet from falling : that I may worship acceptably be-
                fore God ; in the light of the living.
                                                                    LVII.
              For the conclusion.                   Destroy not.               By David for a monumental
                 inscription, when he fled to the cave from the presence of Saul.
             1         BE merciful to me, O God; be merciful to me.                                                         For in
                 thee my soul hath trusted : and in the shadow of thy wings I
             2 will put my trust, until this iniquity pass away.                                                 I will cry to
             3 God the Most high ; to God who to me hath been kind.                                                                 He
                 sent from heaven and saved me.                                   He delivered up to reproach
             4 them who were treading me down.                                          God sent forth his mercy
                 and his truth ; and delivered my soul from the midst of lions.
                 I laid me down to sleep, troubled as I was.                                           As for the sons of
                 men, their teeth are weapons and darts; and their tongue is
             5 a sharp sword.                    Be thou,                 God, exalted above the heavens
             6 and thy glory over all the earth.                                       They had prepared snares
                 for my feet ; and had caused my soul to bow down.                                                              They
                 dug a pit before me : but into it they themselves have fallen
             7 My heart is prepared,                                 God ; my heart is prepared I will
           1                                                                                        ;
                                                PSALMS.
           8 sing and to vocal join instrumental musick.                      Awake my glory
              —awake psaltery and kithara: I myself will awake early.                              I
           9 will praise thee,             Lord, among peoples: among nations I
         10 will hymn thy praise.              For thy mercy is magnified up to hea-
         1    ven and thy truth up to the clouds.                  Be thou,         God, exalted
              above the heavens, and thy glory over all the earth.
                                                  LVIII.
            For the conclusion.         Destroy not.       By David, for a monumental
                                                inscription.
           1       DO you indeed speak righteousness?                      Do you judge up-
           2 rightly,         sons of men?           In heart, indeed, you are working
           3 iniquity in the land : your hands are weaving injustice.                         From
              the womb the wicked are in a state of alienation, they have
           4 gone astray from their birth—they spoke lies.                         They have a
              venom like that of a serpent—like that of a deaf adder which
           5 stoppeth its ears ; which will not hearken to the voice of charm-
           6 ers; nor to the charm administered by the wise.                            God hath
              broken their teeth in their mouth : the Lord hath broken the
           7 lion's grinders.         They shall be despised like water passing by.
           8 He will bend his bow till they be weakened.                          Like melting
              wax they shall be dissolved.              A fire fell and they saw not the
           9 sun.     Before your bramble bush can make its prickles felt; it
         10 will devour you as it were alive, as with wrath.                         The righte-
              ous will rejoice when he seeth the punishment of the wicked
              he will wash his hands in the blood of the sinner.                        And man
              will say, Since there is indeed a reward for the righteous,
              there is a God who judgeth those on the earth.
                                                    LIX.
           For the conclusion.          Destroy not.        By David, for a monumental
              inscription, when Saul sent and watched his house in order to
              put him to death.
           1       DELIVEE me,                God, from mine enemies: and redeem
           2 me from them who rise up against me.                      Deliver me from them
                                                         PSALMS.
              who work iniquity; and save me from blood thirsty men.
          3 For behold they have hunted my life: the mighty are set
              against me : though there is no transgression—no sin,                                                Lord,
          4 in me.          Without transgression I ran and kept a straight course
                                                                                                                           ;
          5 awake to meet me and behold.                                Do thou,             Lord, the God of
              hosts, the God of Israel ! attend to visit all the nations : shew no
          6 mercy to any workers of iniquity.                               They are to return at even-
          7 ing ; and suffer hunger like a dog, and go round the city. Behold
              they are to speak oraculously with their mouth; and have a
          8 sword in their lips ; For who heard?                                    But thou,              Lord, wilt
              laugh them to scorn.                   Thou canst set at nought all the nations.
          9 My strength is with thee : I will keep watch : for thou,                                                God,
        10 art my supporter. My God will cause his mercy to go before me :
        11 my God will display it to me among mine enemies.                                               Slay them
              not.      Perhaps they may have forgotten thy law.                                      Scatter them
              with thy power; and bring them back,                                        Lord, my defender.
        12 Let them be but arrested in their pride; the destructions at-
              tendant on their oath and falsehood, will shew the sin of their
        13 mouth, the word of their lips.                              Under destructive wrath they
              cannot subsist.              Let them know that the God of Jacob ruleth
        14 over the ends of the earth.                           They are to return at evening and
        15 suffer hunger like a dog and go round the city.                                          Let them dis-
              perse, that they may eat ; and if they are not satisfied, let them
        16 murmur.              But I will sing of thy power; and in the morning
              exult in thy mercy : because thou wast my supporter, and my
        17 refuge in the day of my affliction.                                  Thou art my helper; to
              thee,         my God, I will sing ; thou art my supporter, my God,
              my comfort.
                                                              LX.
          For the conclusion.                For those wlio are still to be changed.                              For a
              monumental inscription.                    By David,for instruction, when he had
              burned Syrian Mesopotamia, and Syrian Sobal; and Joab had
              returned, when he smote in the valley of Salt, hoelve thousand.
          1             GOD, thou didst cast us off and destroy us; thou wast
          2 angry, but hast had compassion on us.                                    Thou hast shaken the
              land and troubled it.                  Heal the breaches of it ; for it hath been
          3 shaken.           Thou hast shewn thy people hard things; thou hast
                                                                       —:
                                   PSALMS.
        4 made us drink the wine of astonishment.     Thou hast given to
          them who fear thee, a signal to flee from the face of the bow
        5 that thy beloved may be delivered, save with thy right hand
        6 and hearken to me.   God hath spoken in his sanctuary.   I shall
          rejoice and divide Sikima, and mete out the valley of tents.
        7 Galaad is mine ; and mine is Manasses : Ephraim is the strength
        8 of my head ; Juda, my king ; Moab is the cauldron of my
          hope.  Over Idumea I will extend my march: to me the Phi-
        9 listines are subjected. Who will lead me to the fortified city
       10 who will guide me to Idumea ?      Wilt not thou,     God, who
          didst cast us off—wilt not thou,     God, go out with our ar-
       il mies?   Grant us help, because of affliction; safety from man
       12 is indeed vain.    Through God we can exert power, he can
          bring to nothing them who afflict us.
                                      LXI.
              For the conclusion.  Among the Hymns.     By David.
        1     HEAK, O God, my supplication : attend to this prayer of
        2 mine.   From the extremity of the land, I cried to thee, when
          my heart began to despond : at Petra thou didst raise me up,
        3 and conduct me.     Because thou hast been my hope—a strong
        4 tower from the face of a foe ; I shall dwell at thy tabernacle
        5 forever—I shall be sheltered in the covert of thy wings.     Be-
           cause thou, O God, hast heard my prayer—hast given a pos-
        6 session to them who fear thy name ; thou wilt add days to the
        7 days of a king, and prolong his years to endless ages ; he will
           continue forever in the presence of God.    that every of them
        8 may find out his mercy and truth !    So will I sing to thy name
           forever, that I may, day by day, perform my vows.
                                     LXIL
            For the conclusion.  For Idithun.   A Psalm.    By David.
         1    SHALL not my soul be subjected to God? For from him is
         2 my salvation.  For my God and my Saviour himself, is my sup-
         3 porter—I shall never any more be shaken.     How long will you
                                                                                                                                                  ;:
                                                                    PSALMS.
                 set yourselves against a man ?                                   You are all committing murder,
            4 as with a bended wall and a rampart pushed down.                                                                  But they
                 had determined to pull down my honour. I was fleeing in thirst
                 with their mouth they blessed, but with their heart they im-
            5 precated curses.                        But be thou, O my soul, subjected to God
            6*   for from him is mine expectation.                                           Because my God and my
                 Saviour himself, is my support ; I shall no more wander as an
            7 exile.             In God is my safety and my glory ; he is the God of my
            8 help, and on God is my reliance.                                            Trust in him all ye congre-
                 gated people : pour out your hearts before him ; for God is our
            9 helper. But as for the vain sons of men—the lying sons of men ;
          10 Even in an unfair balance they are altogether vanity.                                                                       Trust
                 not in oppression—nor eagerly covet plunder ; if riches flow in,
          11 set not your heart on them.                                      Once God hath spoken ; these two
                 things I have heard : That strength belongeth to God, and that
                 mercy,               Lord, is thine : that thou wilt render to every one
                 according to his works
                                                                       LXIII.
               A Psalm by David, when he teas in the urilderness of Idumea.
             1                  GOD, my God! to approach thee, I rise early.                                                                 My
                  soul thirsted for thee.                            For thee [I thirst] with all the vehe-
                  ment desire with which my flesh pines in a land, desert, track-
             2 less and without water.                                Thus have I appeared to thee in the
             3 sanctuary ; that I might see thy power and thy glory.                                                                Because
                  thy kindness is better than life ; my lips shall continually praise
             4 thee.            Thus will I bless thee while I live : and in thy name I
             5 will lift up my hands.                               Let my soul be filled as with marrow
             6 and fatness : that my joyful lips may praise thy name.                                                                       If I
                  recollected thee on my bed : in the morning watches I niedi-
             7 tated on thee.                     Because thou hast been my helper : therefore in
             8 the shadow of thy wings I will rejoice.                                                      My soul hath kept
             9 close to thee: thy right hand hath supported me.                                                               But as for
                  these who sought my life in vain ; they shall go to the lowest
           10 parts of the earth.                            They shall be delivered up to the edge of
           11 the sword : they shall be portions for jackals.                                                         But the joy of
                  the king will be in God.                                    Every one who sweareth by him
                                  PSALMS.
          shall glory ; because the mouth of them who speak lies is
          stopped.
                                    LXIV.
                    For the conclusion.A Psalm by David.
        1     HEAE,     God, my prayer when I invoke thee.    From the
        2 fear of an enemy deliver my soul.    Thou hast sheltered me
          from the conspiracy of wicked men—from the multitude of
        3 them who are working iniquity.  They sharpened their tongues
        4 like a sword : they bent a bow, a bitter thing, to shoot secret-
          ly a blameless man: They are to shoot him suddenly and not
        5 be afraid. They strengthened for themselves an evil matter:
        6 they talked of hiding snares, saying, Who can see us ?  They
          searched for iniquity : they failed in the search.A man is to
        7 come with a deep heart; and God is to be exalted.       Their
          wounds became the dart of infants : when their tongues vili-
        8 fied him.  All that saw them were troubled : Then every man
        9 was afraid.  Then they rehearsed the works of God ; then they
       10 understood his doings.  Let the righteous rejoice in the Lord
          and trust in him : and let all the upright in heart be praised.
                                    LXV.
               For the conclusion.A Psalm by David.    An Ode.
        1     TO thee, O God, a hymn in Sion is seemly: and to thee
        2 a vow should be paid. Hearken to my prayer. To thee all flesh
        3 should come.   The acts of transgressors prevailed over us : but
        4 thou canst pardon our sins. Happy he, whom thou hast chosen
        5 and taken to thyself! He shall dwell in thy courts. Let us be
          satisfied with the good things of thy house : thy temple is holy.
        6 Thou art wonderful for righteousness : hear us O God, our
          Saviour.  Thou art the hope of all the ends of the earth : and
          of them at sea far off.  Thou establishest the mountains by
        7 thy power : thou art begirt with majesty.   Thou causest the
        8 cavity of the sea to rage; the billows thereof to roar.When
          nations are troubled and the inhabitants on its borders terri-
          fied at thy signs ; thou canst make the outgoings of the morn-
                                                                                                                                                                                               ;
                                                                                         PSALMS.
                 9 ing and evening joyous.                                                   Thou hast visited the earth and wa-
                       tered it : thou hast multiplied the means of enriching it.                                                                                                    The
                       river of G-od is full of water : thou hast provided the supply
              10 for it.                     Because such is thy provision,                                                                !     water its furrows
                       plenteously : multiply its productions.                                                                   By these showers on it,
                       it      will be gladdened; and will give a spring to vegetation.
              11 Bless the crown of the year with thy goodness : and let the
              12 fields be filled with fatness—let the mountains of the wilder-
              13 ness be made fertile ; and the hills be girt with joy.                                                                                                The rams
                       of the flocks have clothed themselves : and the valleys abound
                       with corn.                      Let them shout and hymn thy praise.
                                                                                             LXVL
                     For the conclusion.                                   An Ode of a Psalm.                                           On the resurrection.
                  1              SHOUT for God in triumphant strains, all ye lands.                                                                                                 Sing
                 2 harmoniously to his name, ascribe glory to his praise.                                                                                                      Say to
                  3 God, How awful are thy works !                                                                       For the greatness of thy
                  4 power, let thine enemies submit to thee.                                                                                    Let all the earth
                        worship thee.                            With music vocal and instrumental let them
                        sing to thee—let them sing harmoniously to thy name.
                  5              Come and see the works of God !                                                                 He is awful in counsels
                  6 touching the sons of men.                                                         He it is who turned the sea into
                        dry land ; that they might march on foot through a flood.
                  7 There let us rejoice in him who ruleth by his everlasting pow-
                        er.         His eyes look down on the nations.                                                                Let not the rebellious
                        exalt themselves.
                  8                    !    Bless our God, ye nations ; and cause the sound of
                  9 his praise to be heard.                                               He it is who hath kept my soul alive
               10 and hath not given my feet to the briny deep.                                                                                                For thou,
               11 God, didst prove us, thou hast tried us as silver is tried.                                                                                                     Thou
                        didst bring us into the net : thou didst lay affliction on our
               12 back: thou didst mount men over our heads; we have passed
                        through fire and water.                                           But thou hast brought us to a place of
               13 rest.                  I will go to thy house with whole burnt offerings : To
               14 thee I will perform my vows ; which my lips have enjoined
                                                                                                                                                                                              ;
               15 and which my mouth spoke in my affliction.                                                                                            To thee I will
                        offer whole burnt offerings; full of marrow, with frankincense
                        and rams.                      To thee I will sacrifice bullocks and goats.
                                 VOL. II.                                                          d d
                                                                           ——
                                      PSALMS.
        16     Come, hearken, all ye who fear God, and I will tell you
        17 what he hath done for rny soul.       To him I uttered a cry with
           my mouth; and with my tongue repeated this aloud.
        18     If I have regarded iniquity in my heart ; let not the Lord
        19 hearken.    For this cause God hearkened to me : he attended to
        20 the sound of my prayer.     Blessed be God who hath not reject-
           ed my prayer ; nor turned away his mercy from me.
                                       LXYII.
          For the conclusion.   Among the Hymns.       A Psalm by David.
         1     GOD be merciful to us, and bless us ; and may he cause
        2 his face to shine on us.     Because of knowing thy way on the
        3 earth, thy salvation among all nations ; let peoples praise thee,
        4 O God, let all peoples praise thee.    Let nations be glad and re-
           joice, because thou judgest peoples righteously, and wilt guide
        5 nations on the earth.     Let peoples praise thee, O God, let all
        6 peoples praise thee.    The earth hath yielded its increase : may
        7 God, our God, bless us !     May God bless us !     And let all the
           ends of the earth fear him.
                                      LXVIII.
              For the conclusion.   By David.    A Psalm of an Ode.
        1     LET God arise and his enemies be scattered ; and let them
        2 who hate him flee before him.       As smoke vanisheth, let them
          disappear : as wax melteth before fire, so let sinners perish at
        3 the presence of God.     But let them who are righteous rejoice
          let them shout for joy at the presence of God—let them be
          transported with gladness.
        4     2. Sing to God ; celebrate his name in songs : make way
          for him who is riding westward.     His name is the Lord, rejoice
        5 before him.    Let them be awed at the presence of him, who is
          the father of the fatherless, and the judge of them who are wi-
        6 dows.   God is in a place consecrated to him : God settleth the
          lonely in a family, having brought out with strength them who
          had been bound ; in like manner them who were rebellious
          them, whose habitation is now in tombs.
                                    PSALMS.
       7     3. When thou,       God, wentest forth before thy people;
       8 when thou wast marching through the wilderness; the earth
         shook and the heavens dissolved in showers at the presence of
       9 the God of Sina—at the presence of the God of Israel.         Thou,
            God, canst assign to thy heritage rain, at pleasure ; when
      10 they were fainty thou didst refresh them.     Thine animals dwell
         among them : in thy goodness thou didst provide for the dis-
         tressed.
      11     4. God the Lord will issue an order to them, who publish
      12 good news to the mighty host—the king of the armies of the
         Beloved [to the army] of the Beloved, to divide spoils for beau-
      13 tifying the house.    Though you may have slept in kitchens;
         the wings of a dove covered with silver, while its back is spang-
      14 led with yellow gold, shall, when the Almighty scattereth kings
         before it, be white as the snow on Selmon.
      15     5. The mountain of God ! a fertile mountain !      Is a curdled
      16 mountain a fertile mountain ?     But why do you suppose curdled
         mountains? This is the mount on which God is pleased to dwell,
          for the Lord will at length dwell there.
      17     6. The chariots of God are innumerable: there are thou-
          sands of happy attendants.    The Lord was among them at Sina,
      18 In this holy place having ascended on high thou hast led cap-
          tivity captive ; and received gifts in the manner of man in to-
      19 ken (for some were incredulous) of thy dwelling there.        Bless-
          ed be the Lord God !   Blessed be the Lord.    Day by day let the
          God of our salvation prosper us !
      20     7. Our God is the God to save ; and to the Lord belong
      21 the out goings of death.      But God will crush the heads of his
          enemies—the hairy head of them who persist in their trespas-
      22 ses.   The Lord said, I will bring back from Basan ; I will bring
      23 back through the depths of a sea ; that thy foot may be dip-
          ped in blood—the tongue of thy dogs, in that of his enemies.
      24      8. Thy marches, O God, have been seen—the marches of
      25 my God, my king, in this holy place.       The chiefs went before
          next to the band of musick, in the midst of damsels playing
       26 on timbrels, "bless ye God in assemblies—the Lord, ye from
       27 the fountains of Israel!'   There was young Benjamin in a rap-
          ture ; there the chiefs of Juda, the leaders ; the chiefs of Zabu-
       28 Ion, the chiefs of Nephthaleim.    Command,      God, thine army ;
                                      PSALMS.
          strengthen this,     God, which thou hast established among us.
       29 Because of thy temple at Jerusalem, let kings bring thee gifts.
       30 Kebuke the wild beasts of the reed, that the silvery shoals may
          not be intercepted.     Is there an assembly of bulls among the
          heifers of the people ? Scatter the nations which delight in war.
       31     9. Ambassadors shall come from Egypt; Ethiopia shall
       32 stretch out her hands to God.           ye kingdoms of the earth,
       33 sing to God—sing to the Lord in harmonious strains ; in har-
          monious strains sing to God, who rode on the eastern heaven
          of heaven. Behold with his voice he will utter a voice of power.
       34 Ascribe ye glory to God.       His excellency is over Israel ; and
       35 his power is in the clouds.     God is awful among his saints : he
          is the God of Israel.     He will give power and strength to his
           people.  Blessed be our God !
                                        LXIX.
           For the conclusion.    Respecting them who arc to he changed.
                                      By David.
        1     SAVE me,        God; for waters have broken in on my soul.
        2 I am sunk down into deep mire, and there is no support be-
           neath.   I am come into the depth of the sea, and a tempest hath
        3 overwhelmed me.       I am weary with crying ; my throat is hoarse ;
        4 and mine eyes fail while I wait for my God.           They who hate
           me without cause are more than the hairs of my head.           Mine
           enemies who persecute me wrongfully are become strong.              I
           have made compensation on the spot for what I did not take by
        5 violence.    Thou, O God, knowest my folly—and my trespas-
        6 ses are not hid from thee.     Let not them who wait for thee,
           Lord of hosts, be put to shame on my account.         Let not them
           be put to confusion for my sake, who are seeking thee,           God
        7 of Israel.   Because for thy sake I have borne reproach, confu-
        8 sion hath covered my face.       To my brethren I am become an
        9 alien, and a stranger to the children of my mother.           For my
           zeal for thy house hath consumed me ; and on me have fallen
       10 the reproaches of them, who reproached thee.          When I bowed
           down my soul with fasting; it furnished occasion for reproach-
       11 ing me.     When I clothed myself with sackcloth, I became to
      9                                                                  —-;;
                                   PSALMS.
     12 them a proverb—they who sat in the gate spoke against me ;
     13 and they who drank wine, made me their song.          But to thee,
           Lord, I, in my prayer, applied : it was a time of favour.
        God, in the multitude of thy mercy—in the truth of thy salva-
     14 tion, hearken to me.    Save me from mire that I may not sink
        down. Let me he delivered from them who hate me and out
     15 of this depth of waters.  Let not a flood of water overwhelm me,
        nor a whirlpool swallow me up, nor a pit shut its mouth up-
     16 on me.    Hear me,       Lord, for thy loving kindness is good
        according to thine abundant         mercy, look down upon me.
     17 Turn not away thy face from thy servant ; because I am in
     18 distress, hear me speedily.    Draw near to my soul and redeem
     1  it ;deliver me, because of mine enemies.     For thou knowest my
        reproach, and my shame and my confusion ; all mine adversa
     20 ries are before thee.   My soul expected reproach and misery.
        1 waited for a condoler, but there was none—for a comforter,
     21 but none could I find.    They indeed have given me gall for my
     22 food, and for my thirst, have made me drink vinegar.            Let
        their table before them become a snare and a recompence and a
     23 stumbling block.    Let their eyes be darkened that they may not
     24 see, and bow down their neck continually.       Pour out thine in-
        dignation upon them, and let thy wrathful ire take hold of
     25 them.    Let their fold be desolate, and in their dwellings no in-
     26 habitant.   Because him, whom thou smotest, they persecuted,
     27 aud have added to the pains of my wounds ; add thou iniquity
        to their iniquity, and let them not come into thy righteousness.
     28 Let them be blotted out of the book of the living, and not
     29 be enrolled with the righteous.      I am afflicted—I am full of
        pain ; but the salvation of thy countenance hath upheld me.
     30 I will praise the name of my God with an Ode : I will mag-
     31 nify him with thanksgiving ; this indeed will be more pleasing
     32 to God than a young bull with horns and hoofs. Let the afflict-
         ed behold and rejoice : seek God diligently and you shall live.
     33 For the Lord hath hearkened to the needy, and hath not despis-
     34 ed his prisoners.   Let the heavens and the earth praise him
     35 the sea and all that move therein.     For God will save Sion, and
         the cities of Judea shall be rebuilded, and the seed of his ser-
         vants shall dwell there.    They shall inherit it and possess it
         and they who love his name shall dwell therein.
                                                                                                                                                         :
                                                                          PSALMS.
                                                                              LXX.
                  For the conclusion.                       By David.                 For a memorial, that the Lord
                                                                     hath saved me.
                 1                GOD, draw near to my assistance : O Lord, make haste
                2 to help me.                     Let them who seek my life be shamed and con-
                     founded ; let them be turned back and put to shame who wish
                3 me evils.                 Let them who say to me, Ha ! Ha ! be turned back
                4 suddenly, covered with shame.                                             Let all who seek thee exult,
                     and rejoice for thee.                         Let them who love thy salvation, say con-
                5 tinually, Let God be magnified.                                            As for me, I am afflicted and
                     needy ;                God, assist me.                     Thou art my help and my deliver-
                     er :          Lord, make no delay.
                                                                            LXXI.
              By David.                 Sung by the children of Jonadab, and the first captives.
                 1           IN thee,                  Lord, I have put my trust : let me never be
                 2 put to confusion.                          In thy saving mercy deliver me and re-
                 3 scue me : incline thine ear to me and save me.                                                                 Be thou to
                     me a protecting God, and a place of strength to save me
                4 for thou art my fortress and my refuge.                                                                  my God, deli-
                     ver me out of a sinner's hand—out of the hand of an un-
                 5 righteous and cruel man.                                    For thou,                    Lord, art mine expec-
                 6 tation—thou, Lord, art my hope, from my youth ; upon thee
                      I have leaned from the womb : from my birth thou art my pro-
                 7 tector ; thou art the constant subject of my song.                                                              To many I
                 8 became a wonder ; but thou wast my powerful assistant.                                                                          Let
                     my mouth be filled with praise, that I may celebrate thy glory
                 9 —thy majesty, all the day long.                                           Cast me not off in the time of
              10 old age : forsake me not when my strength faileth.                                                                       Because
                     mine enemies have said to me—nay, my life guards have con-
               11 suited together, saying, "God hath forsaken him; pursue and
               12 take him, for he hath no deliverer."                                                        God, be not far from
               13 me; draw near,                              my God, to my assistance.                                     Let them who
                      plot against my life be confounded, and perish;—let them,
                      who seek to do me hurt, be cloathed with shame and confu-
               14 sion.             But as for me, I will hope continually; and I will yet
                                                                  —
                                PSALMS.
     15 praise thee more and more.   My mouth shall proclaim thy sa-
        ving mercy—thy salvation all the day long.  Because I am un-
     16 practised in studies I will go in the strength of the Lord ; I will
     17 mention the saving mercy of thee,     Lord, alone.  Thou,
        God, hast taught me from my youth : and thus far I can de-
     18 clare thy wonders—even to old age and grey hairs.       God,
        forsake me not, till I declare thine arm to the rising genera-
     19 tion—thy power and thy righteousness,     God most High
        the great things which thou hast done.  Who is like thee,
     20 God?     what afflictions many and sore hast thou shewn me !
        But thou hast returned and quickened me ; and brought me up
     21 again from the depths of the earth. Thou hast multiplied thy
        saving mercy :  thou hast returned and comforted me ; and
     22 hast brought me up again from the depths of the earth.There-
        fore with a musical instrument I will praise thee—thy truth,
        O God: I will sing and play on a kithara to thee, the holy one
     23 of Israel.My lips shall rejoice, when I play to thee ; my soul
     24 also which thou hast redeemed.  My tongue shall still talk of
        thy saving mercy all the day long, when they, who seek my
        hurt are shamed and confounded.
                                 LXXII.
                              For Solomon.
      1       GOD give the king thy judgment ; and thy righteous-
      2 ness to the king's son. That he may judge thy people with
      3 righteousness ;and thy distressed ones with judgment.    Let
        the mountains and the hills resume peace for thy people:
      4 Let him judge righteously such of the people as are distress-
        ed ; and save the children of the needy :and humble oppres-
     5 sors : and continue, as long as the sun and moon, through all
      6 generations. Let him descend like rain on a fleece ; and like
      7 showers gently falling on the ground. In his days let right-
        eousness spring up, with abundance of peace, till the moon is
      8 no more.  And let him rule from sea to sea ; and from the river
     9 to the limits of the world. Let the Ethiopeans bow down be-
     10 fore him ; and let his enemies lick the dust.Let the kings of
                                                                                                                    ;;
                                                          PSALMS.
                  Tharsis and the isles bring gifts; the kings of the Arabs and
             11 Saba offer presents.               Let all the kings pay him homage—all the
             12 nations serve as vassals.                   Because he delivered the poor from
             13 the oppressor, and the needy who had no helper: he will
                  spare the afflicted and needy ; and save the lives of those in
             14 distress—from usury and injustice he will redeem their lives
             15 and their name will be precious in his sight : and he shall live,
                  and to him shall be given of the gold of Arabia ; and prayer
                  shall be made for him continually : and he will be blessed all
             16 the day long.             Let there be in the land a settlement on the tops
                  of the mountains ; the fruit thereof will overtop Libanus : and
             17 they of a city shall flourish like the grass of the earth.                                 Let his
                  name be blessed for ever !                   His name shall endure longer than
                  the sun : and by him all the tribes of the earth shall be blessed.
             18 All the nations shall hail him happy.                           Blessed be the Lord the
             19 God of Israel ; who alone doth wonderful things.                                  And blessed
                  be his glorious name for ever and ever : and let all the earth be
                  filled with his glory.             Amen.         Amen.
                     An intermission of the Hymns of David son of Jessai.
                                                          LXXIII.
                                                 A Psalm by Asaph.
              1        HOW good is God to Israel !                         To such as are upright in
              2 heart!        But as for me, my feet were almost gone : my steps
              3 had well nigh slipped ; for I envied the unrighteous ; when I
              4 saw the prosperity of sinners.                    For there is no lifting up of eyes
              5 in their death : and in their affliction they have support.                                  They
                  are not in trouble like other men; nor with other men to be
              6 scourged.            Therefore haughtiness hath got a mastery over
                  them—they have clothed themselves with their iniquity and
              7 impiety.         Their iniquity springeth up as it were out of fatness
              8 they passed on to the purpose of their heart.                                  They thought
                  and spoke wickedly—they spoke injustice with a lofty air.
              9 They set their mouth against heaven ; and their tongue passed
            10 on over the earth.                Shall my people therefore turn to this; and
            9
                                                                PSALMS.
          11 will full days be found by them?                                            They indeed said, How
                doth God know? and, Is there any knowledge in the Most
          12 High ? Behold these who are sinful men ; are always prosper-
          13 ous and have gotten wealth.                                  Nay, I myself said, Have I then
                in vain kept my heart just ; and washed my hands in innocen-
          14 cy.          All the day long I have been scourged ; and the accusation
          15 against me is renewed every morning.                                           Had I said, I will make
                such a declaration openly: I should have been treacherous to
          16 the generation of thy children.                                          I therefore supposed, the
          17 trouble of knowing this is before me.                                                When I go to the
          18 sanctuary of God ; I may understand the final issue.                                                       It is but
                for their frauds thou hast dealt thus with them.                                                     Thou hast
          1     overthrown them by their exaltation.                                             !  how they were for
                destruction !             They are gone in a moment ! They perished for
          20 their iniquity ! As a dream of one awaked out of sleep.                                                          Thou,
          21         Lord, in thy city wilt spurn their ghost ; therefore my heart
          22 was cheered and my reins were changed.                                                I indeed was despi-
                cable for my want of knowledge ; I was brutish as a beast be-
          23 fore thee.              As for me I shall be with thee continually : thou hast
          24 held me by my right hand : with thy counsel thou hast guid-
          25 ed me, and taken me to thyself with glory. For what is there
                in heaven for me ; or what on earth have I desired, besides
          26 thee ? Hath my heart and my flesh failed ? God is the strength
          27 of my heart—God is my portion forever.                                                    Seeing they who
                withdrew themselves from thee, shall perish—thou hast cut
          28 off every one who goeth a whoring from thee : It is therefore
                good for me to cleave to God—to place my hope upon the
                Lord : that I may publish all thy praises in the gates of the
                daughter of Sion.
                                                                 LXXIV.
                                             Of understanding.                    By Asaph.
            1          O GOD, why hast thou utterly cast off? Why is thy wrath
            2 extreme against the sheep of thy pasture? Kemember thy
                congregation which thou hast purchased of old ; this portion
                of thine inheritance which thou hast redeemed ; this mount
           3 Sion on which thou hast dwelt.                                  Lift up thy hands against their
                      VOL. II.                                       e e
                                                                                                                                         :::
                                                                 PSALMS.
                   perpetual haughtiness ; for all that the enemy hath wickedly
              4 done in thy Holies. They who hate thee have indeed triumph-
                   ed :     in the midst of thy festival they set up their own signs
              5 The signs pointing to the entrance above they did not know.
                   As if in a forest of trees, they cut down with axes the doors
              6 of that entrance.                     Then with hatchets and mattocks they broke
               7 it down.              They burned thy sanctuary to the ground with fire
              8 they profaned the habitation of thy name.                                                   They said, The
                   whole brood of them are in their heart set upon this :                                                       come,
                   let us cause to cease from the land the festivals of the Lord.
               9 The signs peculiarly ours we do not see : there is no more a
             10 prophet ;              nor wil] he any more acknowledge us.                                            How long
                   O God, shall the enemy reproach?                                       Shall the adversary blas-
             11 pheme thy name forever? Why dost thou withdraw thy hand?
                   Let thy right hand be ever out of thy bosom.
             12           God was indeed our king of old.                                    He wrought deliverance
            13 in the midst of this land.                                 Thou by thy power didst exercise
                   dominion over the sea : thou didst crush the heads of the dra-
             14 gons in the water.                       Thou didst crush the heads of the dragon
             15 thou gavest him to be meat for the Ethiopean tribes.                                                             Thou
                   didst cause springs and torrents to burst forth.                                                   Thou didst
             16 dry up the rivers of Etham.                                   Thine is the day and the night
             17 is thine : it is thou who preparedst the sun and moon.                                                           Thou
                   hast made all the borders of the earth : summer and spring
             18 were made by thee.                            Remember this creation of thine.                                       An
                   enemy hath reproached the Lord ; a foolish people hath blas-
             19 phemed thy name.                            Deliver not up to the wild beasts a soul
                    which praiseth thee.                      Forget not forever the souls of thy afflict-
             20 ed jjeople.                  Have respect to thy covenant, because the dark
                    places of this land have been filled with habitations of ini-
             21 quity ;            let not him who hath been humbled and shamed be
                    utterly scorned : let the afflicted and needy praise thy name.
             22 Arise,                 God, plead thine own cause : remember the re-
             23 proaches cast on thee, all day long, by a fool.                                                Forget not the
                    voice of thy suppliants : let the pride of them, who hate thee,
                    ascend continually before thee.
                                                                                                                  ;
                                                    PSALMS.
                                                      LXXV.
           For the conclusion.            Destroy not.         A Psalm of an Ode by Asaph.
         1     (p) LET us praise thee,                     God; let us praise and invoke thy
         2 name. Let me proclaim all thy wonderous works. (J) When I find
         3 a suitable time, I execute righteous judgment, (p) The land, with
             all its inhabitants, is wasted. (J) It was I who strengthened the pil-
         4 lars thereof. I ordered the transgressors not to transgress, and
         5 said to sinners, Exalt not a horn.                           Lift not up your horn on
          6 high ; speak not iniquity against God.                             For it is neither from
          7 east nor from west, nor is it from desart mountains ; for God
          8 is judge ;—he humbleth one and he exalteth another.                                         For in
             the hand of the Lord there is a cup, filled with mixed wine of
             horror ; and out of this he hath poured into that : but the dregs
             of it are not emptied out ; all the sinners of the land shall drink
          9 it. (p) Let me then exult with joy forever, and tune my lyre for
             the God of Jacob. (J) I will break all the horns of sinners, but
             the horn of the righteous shall be exalted.
                                                       LXXVI.
          For the conclusion with hymns. A Psalm by Asaph. An Ode on
                                                   the Assyrians.
          1        IN Judea, God is known ; his name is great in Israel.                                     His
          2 place was in Firene ; and his dwelling is on Sion.                                      There he
          3 broke the strong bows, armour, and sword and battle.
          4        From everlasting mountains, thou shinest marvellously
          5 all the foolish hearted, were struck with consternation.                                          All
              those mighty men have slept their sleep, and found nothing
           6 of their wealth for their hands. At thy rebuke,                                 God of Jacob,
           7 they who had mounted their horses fell fast asleep.                                     Thou art
              terrible ;      who therefore can withstand thee, on the account of
           8 thine indignation. From heaven thou didst cause the sentence to
           9 be heard ; the earth was terrified and was still : when God arose
                                     (p) The Prophet.              (J) Jehovah.
                                PSALMS.
      10 for judgment, to save all the meek in heart.Since the secret
         purpose of man can contribute to thy praise, let the remainder
      11 of it cause a festival to be celebrated for thee.Yow and pay
         your vows to the Lord our God : let all around him bring
      12 gifts to him who is awful—to him who taketh away the spirits
         of chiefs—to him who is terrible to the kings of the earth.
                                 LXXVII.
            For the conclusion.For Idithun. A Psalm by Asaph.
       1     WITH my voice I cried to the Lord, and my voice was to
       2 God, and he hearkened to me.    In the day of my affliction I
         sought God with my hands in the night before him ; and I was
       3 not disappointed. My soul had refused to be comforted ; I re-
         membered God and was made glad—I meditated, though my
       4 spirit was in despondency.  All mine enemies had previously
       5 mounted guard ; I was troubled and did not speak.I consider-
         ed the days of old : I recollected the years of ancient times ;
       6 I meditated at night—I conversed with my heart—I searched
       7 my spirit diligently.Will the Lord cast off forever, and will he
       8 no more be favourable?   Will he entirely cut off mercy, from
        9 generation to generation? Will God forget to be gracious?
          Will he in his anger restrain his compassion ?
      10     Then I said, I have now made a beginning; this is the
      11 change of the right hand of the Most High.    I called to re-
          membrance the works of the Lord.    Seeing I can remember
      12 thy wonders of old : let me therefore meditate on all thy works,
      13 and muse on thine institutions.     God, thy way is in that
      14 which is holy ; what God is great as our God ? Thou art the
          God who worketh miracles : thou hast made thy power known
      15 among the tribes.  With thine arm thou didst redeem this peo-
      16 pie of thine—the children of Jacob and Joseph.   The waters
         saw thee,    God !—the waters saw thee and were terrified,
      17 and the deep gulphs were troubled.  Great was the roaring of
         the waters ; the clouds uttered a sound : for thy bolts were
      18 passing through them.   The sound of thy thunder was in the
         round expanse : thy lightnings illumed the world ; the earth
      19 shook and trembled.  Thy way was through the sea, and thy
      9                                                                       I
                                    PSALMS.
         paths through many waters ; but thy footsteps could not be
         known.    Thou leddest thy people like a flock : by the ministry
         of Moses and Aaron.
                                    LXXVIII.
                         On understanding.      By Asaph.
      1     ATTEND, my people, to my law; incline your ears to the
      2 words of my mouth.        I will open my mouth with parables—
      3 will utter dark sayings of old ;—such as we have heard and
      4 known, which our fathers have related to us.          They were not
         hid from their children : one generation told another the
         praises of the Lord, his acts of power, and the wonders which
      5 he hath done. Thus he raised up a testimony in Jacob, and esta-
         blished a law in Israel, which he commanded our fathers to make
      6 known to their children : that the succeeding generation—the
         children to be born, might know it, and rise and tell the same
       7 to their children : that they might put their trust in God, and
         not forget the works of God, but seek diligently his command-
      8 ments—that they might not be like their fathers—a perverse
         and rebellious generation—a generation which set not their
         hearts aright, and whose spirit was not stedfast with God.
      9      The sons of Ephraim, who bend and shoot the bow, were
     10 turned back in the day of battle.       They did not keep the cove-
     11 nant of God, and would not walk in his law.              They indeed
         forgot his acts of kindness—those wonders of his which he
     12 had shewn them—wonders which he did in the sight of their
     13 fathers : in the land of Egypt, in the plain of Tanis.        He had
         cleft the sea and led them through it ; he had stayed the waters
     14 as in a bottle. He had led them with a cloud by day, and all the
     15 night long with a light of fire ; he had cleft a rock in the wil-
     16 derness, and given them drink as from a great abyss; he had
         brought water out of a rock, and caused streams to flow down
     17 like rivers : But still they proceeded to sin against him—they
     18 provoked the Most High in a desert.         Still they made trial of
        God in their hearts, by asking for meats to their appetites.
     1   Nay, they spoke against God and said, " Can God provide a
     20 table in a desert ?    When he smote a rock, waters gushed out,
        and streams swelled to an overflowing flood.        But can He also
     21 give bread, or provide a table for his people ? "       Therefore the
                                                                         —;
                                    PSALMS.
          Lord heard and was provoked ; and a fire was kindled among
       22 Jacob ; and wrath came up against Israel.   Because they believ-
           ed not in God, nor trusted in his salvation.
       23     Though he had commanded the clouds above, and had
       24 opened the doors of heaven, and had rained down manna for
       25 them to eat, and had given them the bread of heaven, (Man
           was eating the bread of angels) he sent meat for them to sa-
       26 tiety.  He removed the south east wind out of heaven, and by
       27 his power brought on the south west : and rained upon them
          flesh, like dust : and feathered fowls as the sand of the sea
       28 they fell in the midst of their encampment, and all around their
       29 habitation.  Though they ate and were filled abundantly, and
       30 he had given them their desire ; their longing desire was not
       31 stayed ; therefore while the meat was still in their mouth, the
           anger of God came up against them, and slew them amidst
          their fat viands, and fettered the chosen men of Israel.
       32     Notwithstanding all these things they still sinned, and did
       33 not believe his wonderous works ; therefore their days glided
           away in vanity, and their years were attended with impatience.
       34 When he smote them and they sought him, and returned and
       35 inquired early after God, and remembered that God was their
       36 helper, and that God the Most High was their redeemer ; though
           they expressed love for him with their mouth, they lied to him
       37 with their tongue, and their heart was not right with him, nor
       38 were they stedfast in his covenant.   But he being merciful for-
           gave their sins, and would not utterly destroy them.  Yea, many
           a time did he turn away his wrath, and would not suffer all his
       39 wrath to blaze forth ; for he remembered that they were flesh
           a breath going out and not again returning.
       40     How often did they provoke him in the wilderness, and
       41 excite him to anger in the desert ?    They actually turned back
           and tempted God, and provoked to wrath the holy One of Is-
       42 rael.  They remembered not his hand, on the day when he res-
       43 cued them out of the hand of an oppressor ; how he had dis-
           played his signs in Egypt, and his wonders in the plain of Ta-
       44 nis; and had turned their rivers into blood, and their cisterns
        45 so that they could not drink—had sent against them the dog fly
           which devoured them, and swarms of frogs which destroyed
        46 them ; and had given their crops to the canker worm, and their.
                                                                                                                           ;;
                                                         PSALMS.
        47 labours to the locust—had smitten their vineyards with hail,
        48 and their sycamine trees with frost ; and delivered up their cat-
        49 tie to hail, and their substance to the fire—having sent out
              against them his fierce anger, wrath and indignation and afflic-
        50 tion—a mission executed by evil angels : he paved a way for
              his vengeance—he spared not their lives from death : he deli-
        51 vered up their cattle to pestilence, and smote every first born
              in the land of Egypt—the first fruits of their labours in the tents
        52 of Cham ; and brought out his people like sheep, and led them
        53 like a flock in the desert, and guided them safely, so that they
              were not afraid, though the sea overwhelmed their enemies
        54 and brought them to the mount of his holiness—to this raoun-
        oo tain which his right hand purchased ; and drove out nations
              from before them, and gave them by lot their several portions,
              and settled in their dwellings the tribes of Israel.
        06          Still they tempted and provoked God the Most High, and
        57 did not keep his testimonies ; but turned back and broke co-
              venant like their fathers.                       They turned aside like a deceitful
        58 bow.           They provoked him with their mounts, and with their
        59 graven images moved him to jealousy.                                     God heard and despised
        60 them and greatly contemned Israel, and he abandoned the ta-
              bernacle of Selom—the tent in which he had dwelt among men
        61 and delivered up their strength to captivity, and their glory in-
        62 to an enemy's hand ; and gave up his people to the sword, and
        63 slighted his inheritance.                          A fire consumed their young men,
         64 and their virgins made no lamentation.                                      Their priests fell by
              the sword and their widows are not to bewail them.
        65          At length the Lord awaked as one out of sleep, as a mighty
        66 man recovered from wine ; and he smote his enemies in the
         67 hinder parts, and cast an everlasting reproach on them.                                              But he
              rejected the habitation of Joseph, and did not chuse the tribe
         6S of Ephraim ; but made choice of the tribe of Juda—of this
         69 mount Sion which he loved, and built his sanctuary like that
         70 of unicorns               in this land he founded it for this age, and he
                                   ;
               chose David his servant and took him from the flocks of sheep
         71 —he took them from tending the ewes with young to feed his
         72 servant Jacob and Israel his inheritance.                                    And he fed them in
               the integrity of his heart, and guided them by the skill of his
               hands.
                                                                    —
                                  PSALMS.
                                  LXXIX.
                             A Psalm by Asaph.
        1        GOD, nations are come into thine inheritance : they have
          polluted thy holy temple.  They have made Jerusalem a de-
        2 pository for summer fruits. They have given the carcasses of
          thy servants to be meat for the birds of the air—the flesh of thy
        3 saints, to the wild beasts of the earth.They have poured out
          their blood like water round Jerusalem ; and there was none
        4 to bury them.  We are become a reproach to our neighbours
        5 A scoff and a derision to them around us. How long,    Lord,
          wilt thou be angry ? Shall thy jealousy burn like fire forever ?
        6 Pour out thy wrath on the nations that have not acknowledged
          thee; and on kingdoms which have not invoked thy name.
        7 For they have devoured Jacob, and laid waste this place of
        8 his.  Remember not our former iniquities : let thy tender mer-
        9 cies overtake us speedily : as we are greatly distressed ; help
          us,   God, our saviour : for thy glory of thy name deliver us ;
       10 and pardon our sins for thy name's sake.   Perhaps they may
          say among the nations, Where is their God?      Let therefore
          the avengement of the blood of thy servants, which hath been
       11 shed ; be known among the nations in our sight.     Let the
          groans of the prisoners come before thee.  According to the
          mighty power of thine arm ; protect the children of them who
       12 are slain.  Retribute to these neighbours of ours—into their
          bosom seven fold; their reproach, with which they have re-
       13 proached thee,   Lord.  For we are thy people and the sheep
          of  thy pasture : to thee we will render thanks forever : we
           will proclaim thy praise to all generations.
                                   LXXX.
          For the conclusion.Respecting them who cere to be changed.A
            testimony. By Asaph.  A Psalm respecting the Assyrian.
         1    GIVE ear, O shepherd of Israel ! Who leadest Joseph like
         2 a flock—thou who art enthroned on the cherubim ; shine forth
           before Ephraim and Benjamin and Manasses : stir up thy
                                                                                                                                                       ;;
                                                                       PSALMS.
             3 strength and come for our salvation.                                                    Turn us,                    God ; and
             4 let thy face shine ; and we shall be saved.                                                                Lord, the God
                  of hosts !             How long wilt thou continue thine anger, against
             5 the prayer of this servant of thine ?                                                 How long wilt thou feed
                  us with bread of tears ; and give us tears to drink by measure ?
             6*   Thou hast made us a mocking stock to our neighbours : and
             7 our enemies have derided us.                                                      Lord, the God of hosts,
                  bring us back ; and let thy face shine and we shall be saved.
             8 Thou has brought a vine out of Egypt : thou hast cast out
             9 nations and planted it.                                Thou didst prepare the way before it
           10 and plant its roots and the land was filled : and its shade
                  obscured mountains : and its branchy shoots, the cedars of
           11 God.              It extended its branches quite to the sea ; and its spread-
           12 ing boughs quite to the river.                                             Why hast thou broken down
           13 its hedge ; that all who pass by the way, may pluck it ?                                                                          The
                  boar from the forest hath laid it waste ; and a savage beast
           14 hath devoured it.                                    God of hosts, return we beseech thee
           15 look down from heaven and see and visit this vine : and re-
                  pair that which thy right hand hath planted—even for the son
           16 of man, whom thou madest strong for thyself.                                                                   It is burned
                  up with fire and rooted up.                                   At the rebuke of thy countenance
           17 are they to perish ?                                  let thy hand be on the man of thy right
                  hand—on the son of man whom thou hast made strong for
           18 thyself: and let us not depart from thee.                                                           Thou canst quick-
           19 en us that we may invoke thy name.                                                                  Lord, the God of
                  hosts, bring us back : and let thy face shine and we shall be
                  saved.
                                                                        LXXXI.
                 For the conclusion.                        On the wine presses.                          A Psalm by Asaph.
              1           EXULT with joy for God our helper !                                                     Shout triumphant-
             2 ly for the God of Jacob !                                       Take a psalm and bring a tympa-
             3 num—the sweet sounding psaltery with a kithara.                                                                     Sound the
             4 trumpet at the new moon—at the set day of your festival.                                                                          For
                  it is a statute for Israel—a rite established by the God of Ja-
             5 cob—as a testimony for Joseph ; it pointed him out at the time
                  of his coming out of the land of Egypt ; he caused him to hear
             6 a tongue which he knew not : he removed his back from bur-
                  dens.          His hands served at the basket.
                          VOL. II.                                            f f
                                                                                                                            ;;;
                                                          PSALMS.
            7         (J) " In affliction thou didst call upon me, and I delivered
                thee. I heard thee in the secret of a tempest.                                   I proved thee at
            8 the water of strife.                   Hear            my people and I will speak to
                thee.       O Israel, and I will testify to thee.                         If thou wilt hearken
            9 to me, with thee there must be no new fangled god : nor
          10 shalt thou worship a strange god, for I am the Lord thy God
          11 who brought thee up from the land of Egypt.                                         Open thy mouth
                wide and I will fill it.                  But my people did not hearken to my
          12 voice ; nor did Israel attend to me.                                Therefore I gave them up
          13 to the devices of their own hearts.                              Let them walk in their own
          14 devices.            Had my people hearkened to me—had Israel walked
                in my ways : I would have effectually humbled their enemies
          15 and laid my hand on those who afflicted them.                                         The enemies of
          16 the Lord should have submitted to him ; and their time would
                have been forever : and he would have fed them with the finest
                wheat ; and satisfied them with honey from a rock."
                                                           LXXXII.
                                                  A Psalm by Asaph.
             1        GOD standeth in the assembly of gods and in the midst
            2 he judgeth gods. (J) How long will you judge unjustly ; and re-
            3 spect the persons of sinners ?                           Do justice to the fatherless and
            4 the afflicted ;             Justify the lowly and the needy.                                Eescue the
             5 needy and deliver the afflicted out of the sinner's hand.                                             They
                did not know; nor did they understand.                                     They walked on in
             6 darkness.             All the foundations of the land shall be shaken.                                      I
             7 said you are gods ; and all sons of the Most High : but you
             8 shall die like men ; and fall like one of the chiefs,                                          (p) Arise,
                     God, judge the land thyself: for thou shalt inherit all the
                nations.
                                                          LXXXIII.
                                           An Ode of a Psalm by Asaph.
             1             GOD, who can be compared to thee?                                    Keep not silence
             2 nor be still,               God.        For lo ! thine enemies are become noisy
             3 and they who hate thee have raised their heads.                                           Against thy
                 people they have taken crafty counsel.                                And consulted against
                                     (J) Jehovah (p) the prophet or psalmist.
                                PSALMS.
       4 thy holies. Coine, said they, let us cut them off from being a
         nation : and let the name of Israel be no more remembered.
       5 For with this intent they consulted in concert.Against thee
       6 have entered into conspiracy the hordes of the Idumeans and
       7 the Isrnaelites, Moab and the Agarenians ; Gebal and Ammon
         and Amalek, and the Philistines with the inhabitants of Tyre.
       8 Assur also is joined with them : they are come to the assistance
       9 of the children of Lot.  Do thou to them as to Madiani and
      10 Sisara : as to Jabin at the brook of Kison.They were utterly
         cut off at Aendor: they became as dung for the ground;
      11 make their chiefs like Oreb and Zeb—all their chiefs like Ze-
      12 bee and Salmana.   They said, Let us possess ourselves of the
      13 altar of God.    my God make them like a whirl—like stub-
      14 ble opposed to wind.  As fire blazeth through a forest—as a
      15 spark can set mountains on fire : so thou with thy tempest
      16 wilt pursue them, and trouble them with thy wrath. Fill their
         faces with dishonour: that they may seek thy name,     Lord.
      17 Let them be shamed and troubled forever: let them be put
      18 to confusion and perish : and let them know that thy name is
         the Lord—that thou alone art the Most High over all the
         earth.
                                LXXXIV.
      For the conclusion.A Psalm for the wine presses. For the sons of
                                   Kore.
       1       LORD of hosts, how lovely are thine abodes ! my soul
       2 longeth, it panteth for the courts of the Lord.My heart and
       3 my flesh exulted for the living God.For a sparrow hath found
         for itself a house : and a ring-dove a nest for itself, where to
         place its young—[Even I] these altars of thine,     Lord of
       4 hosts.    my king and my God, happy they who dwell in thy
       5 house ; they shall forever praise thee.Happy the man, whose
         support is from thee,    Lord ! he hath laid up in his heart
       6 steps for this mournful vale, to the place on which he hath
       7 fixed ; for the lawgiver will indeed give blessings.They shall
         go on from strength to strength : the God of Gods will be seen
       8 in Sion.    Lord, the God of hosts, hear my prayer ; hearken
       9 to it,  God of Jacob.     God, our shield behold : look down
                                           PSALMS.
       10 on the face of thine Anointed. Because one day in thy courts is
            better than a thousand ; I had rather be in an abject state in
       11 the house of God, than dwell in the tents of sinners.                  Because
           the Lord loveth mercy and truth ; God will give grace and glo-
            ry : the Lord will not withhold good things from them who
       12 walk in innocence.          O Lord of hosts ! happy is the man whose
            trust is in thee.
                                           LXXXV.
                For the conclusion.       A Psalm for the sons of Kore.
        1           LORD, thou hast favoured this land of thine : thou
        2 hast brought back the captivity of Jacob.                Thou hast forgiven
           thy people their iniquities : thou hast covered all their sins.
        3 Thou hast caused all thine anger to cease : thou hast turned
        4 away from thy fierce wrath.            Turn us,       God of our salvation,
        5 and turn away thy wrath from us. Be not angry with us forever.
        6 Wilt thou extend thy wrath to all generations ?                      God, thou
            wilt turn and quicken us, that thy people may rejoice for thee.
        7 Shew us,          Lord, thy loving kindness : And shouldst thou
        8 grant us thy salvation, I will hear what the Lord God will say
           by me: for he will speak peace to his people—to his saints : even
        9 to them who turn their hearts to him ; moreover his salvation will
           be near them who fear him ; that glory may dwell in our land.
       1        Mercy and truth have met each other ; righteousness and
       11 peace have mutually embraced.               Truth hath sprung up out of
           the earth, and righteousness hath looked down from heaven.
       12 For the Lord will exercise benignity, and our land shall yield
       13 her increase.       Righteousness shall go before him, and he will
           imprint his footsteps for a path.
                                          LXXXVI.
                                   A Prayer.       By David.
         1      INCLINE,          Lord, thine ear, and hear me : for I am dis-
         2 tressed and needy.        Preserve my life, for I am holy : save thy
         3 servant,       God, who trusteth in thee.           Be merciful to me,
                                            PSALMS.
        4 Lord, for to thee I will cry all day long.                Comfort the soul of
           thy servant; for to thee,              Lord, I have lifted up rny soul:
        5 for thou, Lord, art kind and gentle, and plenteous in mercy
        6 to all who invoke thee.            Listen,       Lord, to my prayer, and at-
        7 tend to the voice of my supplication.                 In the day of my afflic-
        8 tion, I cried to thee, because thou didst hear me.                        There is
           none among gods like thee,                Lord : nor are any works to be
        9 compared to thine.           Let all the nations which thou hast made,
           come and worship before thee,                 Lord, and praise thy name ;
       10 for thou art great and doest wonders—thou art the Only, the
       11 Great God.        Conduct me,          Lord, in thy way ; and I will walk
           in thy truth.       Let my heart be gladdened, that thy name may
       12 be feared.        I will praise thee,         Lord my God, with my whole
       13 heart, and glorify thy name forever.               For thy mercy to me hath
           been great ; thou hast delivered my soul from the deepest man-
       14 sion of the dead.               God, transgressors rose up against me,
           and an assembly of violent men sought my life ; they indeed
       15 did not set thee before them.                But thou, Lord God, who art
           merciful and gracious, long suffering and abundant in good-
       16 ness and truth, look down upon me and pity me ; give thy
           strength to thy servant and save the son of thy handmaid.
       17 Vouchsafe to me a token for good, and let them who hate me,
           see it and be ashamed, because thou,                   Lord, hast helped me
           and given me comfort.
                                           LXXXVII.
                        A Psalm of an Ode for the sons of Kore.
         1      ON the holy mountains are his foundations !                  The Lord lov-
        3 eth the gates of Sion more than all the dwellings of Jacob.                     Glo-
        4 rious things have been said of thee,               city of God. Shall I men-
           tion Eahab or Babylon to those gaining a knowledge of me ?
           Behold the Philistines and Tyrians, and the tribe of the Ethi-
        5 opians say, Such and such were born there.                        Man will say,
           "Sion is my mother ; " and, "In it such a man was born."
        (3 " The Most High himself founded it " this will be the account
            which the Lord will give in the enrollment of peoples and of
        1
                                    PSALMS.
        7 those chiefs who were born in it.    How delighted must all be,
          whose habitation is in thee !
                                   LXXXVIII.
        An Ode of a Psalm for the sons of Kore.     For the conclusion.  On
          the responsive Maeleth.   On understanding.    By Aiman the Is-
          raelite.
        1        LORD God of my salvation, before thee I have cried
        2 day and night.    Let my prayer come before thee, incline,
        3 Lord, thine ear to my supplication ; for my soul is full of trou-
        4 ble, and my life draweth near to the mansion of the dead.        I
          was counted with them who are going down to the pit ; I be-
        5 came like a man who is past recovery—like one set free among
          the dead—like the prostrate slain, asleep in the grave, whom
          thou hast no more remembered.
        6     Though they were cast off out of thy hand, they laid me in
        7 the lowest pit—in dark places and in the shade of death.       On
          me thy wrath was pressed hard, aad all thy billows thou didst
        8 bring upon me.    Thou hast removed far from me my acquaint-
          ance, they accounted me an abomination to them.        I was deli-
        9 vered up and did not go abroad ; mine eyes were weakened by
          affliction. To thee,    Lord, I cried all the day long : to thee
       10 I stretched forth my hands.     Wilt thou work wonders among
       1  the dead ? Or can physicians raise them up to praise thee ? Can
          any in the grave declare thy kindness ?—Or thy faithfulness,
       12 in destruction?   Can thy wonders be known in darkness—Or
       13 thy saving mercy, in the land of forgetfulness ?    As for me, I
          have cried to thee,      Lord, and in the morning my prayers
       14 shall be before thee.      Lord, why rejectest thou my prayer —
       15 why turnest thou away thy face from me?        I am afflicted and
          in troubles from my youth : though raised high I have been
       16 humbled and distressed.     Thy resentments have come upon
       17 me; and thy terrors have quite confounded me : they have en-
          compassed me like water : all the day long they begirt me at
       18 once.   Thou hast removed a friend far from me, my acquaint-
          ance also, because of misery.
                                                                                                                  ;
                                                     PSALMS.
                                                    LXXXIX.
                          On understanding.               By Aitham the Israelite.
          1           LOKD, I will sing of thy mercies forever ; I will pro-
          2 claim thy truth with my mouth to all generations.                                    Since thou
             hast said, "Mercy shall be built up forever.                                 My truth shall
         3 be established in the heavens.                         I have made a covenant with
         4 my chosen, I have sworn to my servant David, I will establish
             thy seed forever ; I will build up thy throne to all generations."
         5        Lord, let the heavens praise thy wonders and thy truth in
          6 the congregation of the saints.                     For who in heaven can be com-
             pared to the Lord ?                  Or who among the sons of God, likened
          7 to the Lord ?            God is glorified in the counsel of the holy—great
          8 and awful among all around him.                                 Lord, the God of hosts,
             who is like thee ?                 Thou, Lord, art mighty and thy truth is
          9 around thee.            Thou rulest the raging of the sea, and stillest the
        10 rolling billows thereof.                  Thou hast humbled the proud like one
        11 slain—with thy mighty arm thou hast scattered thy foes. Thine
             are the heavens, and the earth is thine, thou hast founded the
        12 world and its fulness.                    Thou hast created the north and the
        13 west ; let Thabor and Hermon rejoice at thy name.                                      Thine arm
             is endowed with power ; let thy hand be strong—thy right hand
        14 exalted. Justice and judgment are the preparation of thy throne ;
        15 mercy and truth shall march before thee.                                  Happy the people
              who know the joyful sound !                        They will walk,               Lord, in the
        16 light of thy presence, and rejoice in thy name all the day long,
        17 and be exalted by thy righteousness.                              For thou art the glory
             of their strength ; and by thy favour our horn shall be exalted.
        18 Forthou art the help of our Lord even of the Holy One ofIsrael,
        19 our king. At that time thou didst speak in vision to thy children
              and say, " I have laid help on one who is Mighty : I have exalted
        20 a chosen one of my people ; I have found David my servant
        21 I have anointed him with holy oil.                            My hand will indeed sup-
        22 port him.            And him mine arm will strengthen.                            Over him an
              enemy shall not gain advantage ; nor shall a son of wicked-
        23 ness any more afflict him.                       For before him I will hew down
        24 his enemies : and them who hate him I will put to flight.                                        And
              my truth and my mercy shall be with him ; and by my name
                                                                    —;;
                                  PSALMS.
       25 his horn shall be exalted.And I will put his hand on the sea
       26 and his right hand on the rivers : and he will invoke me say-
          ing, Thou art my father ; my God and the support of my sal-
       27 vation ; and I will set him as a first born ; high above all the
       28 kings of the earth.  My mercy I will keep for him evermore.
       29 And my covenant with him shall be firm.  And I will establish
       30 his seed forever, and his throne as the days of heaven.If his
          children forsake my law, and do not walk in my judgments
       31 If they profane my statutes ; and do not keep my command-
       32 ments : I will visit their transgressions with a rod ; and their
       33 iniquities with scourges. But from him I will not withdraw
       34 my mercy ; nor suffer my faithfulness to fail.I will not vio-
       35 late my covenant ; nor annul what have passed my lips. Once
          for all I have sworn by my holiness ; that I will not be false
       36 to David.  His seed shall endure forever, and his throne as the
       37 sun before me ; and as the moon forever fixed : and the wit-
          ness in heaven is faithful."
       38    Hast thou then cast off and set at naught—hast thou given
       39 up this thine anointed ? Hast thou made void the covenant
          with thy servant : and profaned his sanctuary to the ground ?
       40 Thou hast broken down all his hedges, and made his strong
       41 holds a ruin. All that pass by have plundered him : he is be-
       42 come a subject of reproach to his neighbours.     Thou hast
          raised up the right hand of his foes, thou hast made all his
       43 enemies glad.  Thou hast turned back the edge of his sword
       44 and hast not assisted him in battle.Thou hast caused his pu-
          rification to cease : thou hast dashed down his throne to the
       45 ground.  Thou hast shortened the days of his throne, and pour-
       46 ed contempt upon him.     How long,     Lord, wilt thou turn
       47 away ?   Shall thy wrath burn like fire forever ? Eemember
          what my being is.  Hast thou created all the sons of men in
       48 vain ? Is there any man who can live and not see death ?Can
       49 he deliver his soul from the mansion of the dead ?     Lord,
          where are thy mercies of old ; which thou didst solemnly pro-
       50 mise David by thy truth?    Remember, O Lord, the reproach
          of thy servants—that of many nations, which I retain in my
       51 bosom—that with which thine enemies, O Lord, have re-
          proached—with which they have reproached the redemption
                                     —
                                  PSALMS.
      52 of thine anointed one.   Blessed be the Lord forever.    Amen
         Amen.
                                     XC.
                     A prayer of Moses the man of Gocl.
       1       LORD, thou hast been a refuge for us, from one gene-
       2 ration to another.  Before the mountains were brought forth ;
         or the earth or the world was formed : even from everlasting
       3 to everlasting thou existest. Wilt thou turn man away to de-
         spondency ; when thou hast said, Beturn ye sons of men ?
       4 Since in thy sight a thousand years are but as yesterday which
       5 is past ; or as a watch in the night : shall these trifling years
         of theirs be as if in the morning, a green herb passed away ?
       6 Should it in the morning bloom and pass away ?    In the even-
       7 ing it would have fallen, withered and become dry.    Because
         we have fallen short by thine anger, and by thine indignation
       8 have been troubled—thou hast placed our iniquities before
         thee : let this age of ours be for the light of thy countenance.
       9 Because all our days have fallen short ; and we have failed by
         thine indignation ; our years have exercised themselves like
      10 a spider. The days of these years of ours are seventy years :
         and if by reason of strength they be eighty years ; still the
      11 surplus of them is labour and sorrow.      Because gentleness
         hath come upon us : let us, therefore, whoever knoweth the
         power of thine anger, be taught, on the account of the terror
      12 of thy wrath, so to number them.      Thus make known thy
         right hand ; and them whose hearts are instructed in wisdom.
      13 Return,    Lord.  How long shall it first be ?And be pacified
      14 with thy servants.  In the morning we were filled with thy
      15 mercy.  We indeed rejoiced and were made glad.     During all
         these days of ours may we be gladdened ; in lieu of the days
         wherein thou hast humbled us ; and of the years in which we
     16 have seen evils. And look upon these thy servants and on thy
     17 works : and be thou the guide of their children.   And let the
         splendor of the Lord our God be over us : and do thou direct
         for us the works of our hands.
            VOL. II.                G g
                                PSALMS.
                                  XCI.
                     The praise of an Ode.  By David.
       1    HE who dwelleth under the protection of the Most High
       2 shall lodge in the shelter of the God of heaven.He will say
         to the Lord, " Thou art my helper : my God is my refuge,
       3 I will trust in him." Because he will deliver thee from the
       4 snare of hunters ; and tumultuous accusation—with his breast
         will overshadow thee : therefore under his wings thou shalt
       5 rest secure.His truth will encompass thee with armour.Thou
         shalt not be afraid of the terror by night ; nor of the arrow
       6 which flieth by day—of the thing which walketh in darkness ;
       7 nor of mischance and the demon of noon day.     A thousand
         may fall at thy side ; and ten thousand at thy right hand : but
       8 it shall not approach thee.But thou with thine eyes shalt ob-
       9 serve, and see the reward of the wicked.   Because thou, O
      10 Lord, my hope ; hast made the Most High thy refuge ; no
         evils shall come upon thee, nor shall a scourge approach thy
      11 dwelling. For he will give his angels a charge concerning thee ;
      12 to keep thee in all thy ways ; with their hands they shall bear
         thee up ; shouldst thou chance to strike thy foot against a
      13 stone.  Upon an asp and a basilisk thou shalt tread : and tram-
      14 pie down a lion and a dragon. (J) Because he trusted in me, I
         will deliver him : I will protect him because he knew my
      15 name.  He will call on me, and I will answer him : I am with
      16 him in affliction : I will deliver him and honour him.With
         length of days I will satisfy him ; and I will shew him my sal-
         vation.
                                  XCIL
                 A Psalm of an Ode for the Sabbath day.
       1     IT is good to give thanks to the Lord ; and with instru-
       2 mental musick sing to thy name,     Most High—to proclaim
         thy loving kindness every morning ; and thy faithfulness every
       3 night : with a ten stringed psaltery ; with an ode on the kithara.
       4 Because thou, Lord, with thy work hast made me glad :
       5 therefore in the works of thy hands I will triumph.How great
               3
                                                                   PSALMS.
               6 are thy works,                        Lord !         How very deep are thy designs ! A
                   senseless man cannot know ; nor can the foolish comprehend
               7 them.            When the wicked sprang up like grass ; all the work-
                   ers of iniquity had a glimpse that they should be destroyed
               8 forever.            As for thee, thou,                          Lord, art Most High forever.
               9 For lo ! thine enemies shall perish : and all the workers of ini-
             10 quity shall be scattered. But my horn shall be exalted like that
             11 of the Oryx; and mine old age invigorated with fresh oil. Mine
                   eye hath looked on among mine enemies : and among the
             12 wicked who rise against me, mine ear will hear.                                                   The righteous
                    shall bloom like a palm tree ; and be multiplied like a cedar on
             1     Lebanon.             Being planted by the house of the Lord they shall
             14 flourish in the courts of our God.                                     In a vigorous old age they
                   shall still multiply ; and continue prosperous ; that they may de-
             15 clare that the Lord my God is righteous ; and that in him
                   there is no injustice.
                                                                     XCIIL
                   For tlic day ^preceding the Sabbath when the world vjas stocked
                              with inhabitants.                     The praise of an Ode by David.
                1         THE Lord hath commended his reign—hath robed him-
                    self with majesty.                    The Lord hath robed himself with power
                    and girded it on.                      For he hath established the world, which
               2 cannot be shaken.                        From that time thy throne was prepared :
               3 thou thyself art from everlasting.                                        The rivers,                Lord, lifted
               4 up—the rivers lifted up their voices.                                       By reason of the roaring
                    of many waters ; the mountainous billows of the sea are won-
               5 derful.             The Lord on high is wonderful ; thy testimonies are
                   firmly established.                     Holiness becometh thy house,                                    Lord ; to
                    the utmost extent of days.
                                                                      XCIV.
                           A Psalm by Darid for the fourth day of the week.
                1         THE Lord is a God of vengeance, the God of vengeance
                2 hath given solemn warning.                                   Exalt thyself,                    thou judge of
                3 the earth ; render a retribution to the proud.                                                How long shall
                                                                                                                               !
                                                                 PSALMS.
                                                                  XCVII.
                                     By David, when his land urns at peace.
               1         THE Lord is king ; let the earth rejoice—let the multitude
               2 of isles be glad.               A cloud and darkness are around him : justice
               3 and judgment are the basis of his throne.                                       Before him a fire
               4 shall march, and burn up his enemies all around.                                             His light-
                   nings shot a glare through the world : the earth saw and trem-
               5 bled.         The mountains melted like wax, at the presence of the
               6 Lord—at the presence of the Lord of the whole earth.                                                    The
                   heavens declared his saving goodness : and all the peoples saw
               7 his glory.            Let all the worshippers of graven images, who boast
                   of their idols, be confounded.                       Worship him all ye his angels.
               8         Sion heard, and was glad, and the daughters of Judea re-
               9 joiced, because of thy judgments,                                   Lord.        For thou art the
                   Lord Most High, over all the earth ; thou art far exalted above
                   all the gods.
             10          Hate iniquity, ye who love the Lord: the Lord preserveth
                   the lives of his saints.                 Out of the hand of sinners he will save
             11 them.           A light is sprung up for the righteous, and joy for the
             12 upright in heart.                    Rejoice in the Lord, ye righteous, and give
                   thanks at the mention of his holiness.
                                                               XCVIII.
                                                      A Psalm by David.
               1               SING to the Lord, a new song, that the Lord hath
                   done wonderful things.                     His own right hand and his holy arm
               2 hath saved him.                  The Lord hath made known his salvation : he
                3 hath displayed his forgiving mercy before the nations.                                             He re-
                   membered his mercy for Jacob—and his truth to the house of
                   Israel.        All the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our
               4 God.          Raise a shout of triumph to God, all ye of the earth
                5 Sing and exult and sing in harmonious strains.                                           Sing to the
                   Lord with a kithara—with a kithara and a tuneful psalm.
               6 With spiral trumpets and the sounding cornet, raise a shout of
                7 triumph for the Lord, before the king.                                   Let the sea roar and
                                PSALMS.
        the fulness thereof  the world and
                          —                 they who dwell therein.
     8 Let the rivers unite in applauses ; let the mountains exult with
     9 joy ; that he is come to judge the earth.   He will judge the
        world with righteousness, and the several tribes with equity.
                                 XCIX.
                            A Psalm by David.
      1    THE Lord hath commenced his reign : let peoples rage.
      2 He is enthroned on the cherubim ; let the earth be shaken.The
      3 Lord is great in Sion and high over all the tribes. Let them
      4 praise thy great name, for it is awful and holy.As the honour
        of a king loveth judgment ; thou hast provided rules of recti-
      5 tude ; and executed judgment and justice in Israel. Extol the
      6 Lord our God ; and bow at his footstool ; for he is holy.Moses
        and Aaron among his priests ; and Samuel among them, who
        invoke his name ; called on the Lord, and he hearkened to
      7 them.  To them he spoke in a pillar of cloud.   They kept his
      8 testimonies and the statutes which he gave them.  O Lord, our
        God, thou didst hearken to them—To them thou wast a God
        propitious ; though executing vengeance on all the people's de-
      9 vices. Extol the Lord our God and worship on his holy hill :
        for the Lord our God is holy.
                                    C.
                            A Psalm of praise.
      1    SHOUT triumphantly for the Lord, all ye of the land.
      2 Serve the Lord with gladness.     Come before him with the
      3 shout of joy.  Know that the Lord is very God : he made us
        and not we ourselves : we are his people and the sheep of his
      4 pasture.  O enter his gates with thanksgiving—his courts with
      5 songs of praise : give thanks to him and praise his name : for
        the Lord is good ; his mercy endureth forever—and his truth
        to all generations.
                                                                                                                                           :
                                                                    PSALMS.
                                                                          CI.
                                                           A Psalm by David.
                 1         I WILL sing of mercy and judgment : to thee,                                                           Lord,
                2 I will tune my lyre.                         I will conduct myself wisely in a perfect
                    way ;           when wilt thou come to me ?                              I have walked in the in-
                3 tegrity of my heart in the midst of my household.                                                   I have not
                    set any wicked thing before mine eyes : them who commit
                4 transgressions I detested.                           A perverse heart hath not cleaved to
                    me.        When the wicked withdrew from me ; I no more acknow-
                5 ledged him.                   Him, who privily slandered his neighbour, I ex-
                    pelled.          With one of a haughty eye and unsatiable heart I
                6 would not eat.                     Mine eyes have been on the faithful of the
                    land ; that they might dwell with me.                                          He who walked in a
                7 perfect way, hath been employed in my service.                                                  He who prac-
                    tised haughtiness found no abode in my family.                                               He who spoke
                8 unjustly was not right in mine eyes.                                        I took the earliest occa-
                    sion to destroy all the sinners of the land—to root out of the
                    city of the Lord all the workers of iniquity.
                                                                         CII.
                      A Prayer for the afflicted when he is oppressed with grief, and
                                   woiddpour out his supplication before the Lord.
                1          HEAKKEN,                       Lord ! to my prayer ; and let my cry come
                2 to thee.              Turn not away thy face from me : on the day of my
                    distress incline thine ear to me : on the day I call on thee, an-
                3 swer me speedily.                        For my days have vanished like smoke
                4 and my bones are parched like dry wood.                                              I am cut down like
                     grass : my heart is withered : because I have forgotten to eat
                5 my bread.                By reason of the voice of my groaning my bones
                6 have cleaved to my flesh.                            I am become like a pelican of the de-
                7 sert : I am like a night hawk on a ruined building.                                                 I have pass-
                     ed sleepless nights; and been like a solitary bird on a house
                8 top.          All the day mine enemies reproached me : and they who
                9 praise me swore against me.                                   Because I have eaten ashes as
               10 bread and have mingled my drink with tears, on account of
                                                                     —;;
                                  PSALMS.
         thine indignation and wrath : (for having lifted me up thou
     11 hast dashed me down).      My days have flitted away like a sha-
      12 dow ; and I am withered like mown grass.    But thou,    Lord,
         endurest forever ; and the memorial of thee to all generations.
      13 Thou wilt arise and have mercy on Sion : for the time to fa-
     14 vour her—the set time is come.    Because thy servants had an
         affection for the stones thereof; therefore they will commise-
     15 rate her rubbish.  And the nations shall fear thy name,   Lord ;
     16 and all the kings of the earth, thy glory. For the Lord will re-
     17 build Sion and appear in his glory.  He hath regarded the pray-
     18 er of the lowly, and hath not despised their supplication.  Let
         her be enrolled for the generation to come : and the people to
     19 be born will praise the Lord : because he hath looked out
     20 from the height of his sanctuary.     Out of heaven the Lord
         looked down on the earth ; to hear the groaning of the pri-
     21 soners ; to set free the sons of them who were slain ; to pro-
         claim the name of the Lord in Sion ; and his praise in Jeru-
     22 salem.   When tribes were assembled together; and kings,
     23 to serve the Lord ; he addressed him in the way of his strength
     24 Shew me the fewness of my days ; call me not away in the
     25 midst of them ; thy years are throughout all generations. Thou
         Lord, in the beginning didst lay the foundations of the earth
     26 and the heavens are the work of thy hands.   They shall perish ;
         but thou wilt endure : they shall all wax old like a garment
         and like a mantle thou wilt fold them up and they shall be
     27 changed : but as for thee, thou art the same ; and thy years
     28 shall have no end.  Let the children of thy servants pitch their
         tents and their seed be established forever.
                                    cm.
                                 By David.
      1     BLESS the Lord,      my soul ; and all within me, his holy
      2 name.   Bless the Lord,   mysoul ; and forget not all the praises
      3 of him; who pardoneth all thine iniquities; who healeth all
      4 thy diseases ; who redeemeth thy life from destruction : who
      5 crowneth thee with mercy and kindness ; who satisfieth thy de-
         sire with good things that thy youth may be renewed like an
            VOL. II.                H h
                                                                                                                   ;
                                                       PSALMS.
            6 eagle's.         It is the Lord, who exerciseth mercy and judgment
            7 for all who were oppressed.                      He made known his ways to Mo-
            8 ses—his pleasure to the children of Israel.                                 He is the Lord
                gracious and merciful ; slow to anger and abundant in kind-
            9 ness ; he will not be angry to utter ruin, nor continue his wrath
          10 forever.          He hath not dealt with us according to our sins ; nor
          11 retributed to us according to our iniquities.                                For high as the
                heaven is from the earth; the Lord hath enlarged his mercy
          12 for them who fear him.                    Far as the east is distant from the west,
          13 he hath removed from us our transgressions.                                 As a father piti-
               eth his children ; the Lord hath pitied them who fear him, be-
          14 cause he knew our formation. O remember that we are dust.                                         As
          15 for man, his days are like grass ; like a flower of the field, so
          16 he may bloom.                 Because a blast of wind passed over it, it is
          17 gone.         It shall no more know its place.                      But the mercy of the
                Lord is from age to age over them who fear him : and his
          18 saving goodness over children's children, for them who keep
          19 his covenant, and remember his commands to do them.                                              The
                Lord hath established his throne in heaven, and his dominion
          20 is exercised over all.                  Bless the Lord, all ye his angels—ye
                mighty powers, who execute his word, on hearing the voice
          21 of his commands.                  Bless the Lord, all ye his armies—ye minis-
          22 ters of his, who perform his will.                          Bless the Lord all ye his
                works, in every place of his dominion.                           O my soul, bless thou
                the Lord.
                                                           CIV.
                                                       By David.
            1        BLESS the Lord O my soul.                           O Lord my God, thou art
                very great.          Thou hast robed thyself with honour and majesty
            2 clothing thyself with light as with a mantle ; stretching out
            3 the heaven as a tent.                 Thou art he who covereth his chambers
                with waters who maketh clouds his chariot—who walketh on
            4 the wings of winds—Who maketh winds his messengers, and
            5 flaming fire his ministers—Who founded the earth on its firm
            6 basis, that it may not be moved forever.                               Is the abyss like a
                garment to be its covering—are waters to stand above the
             7 mountains ?            At thy rebuke they shall flee—at the peal of thy
                                                                                                                                         ;:
                                                                 PSALMS.
             8 thunder they will tremble.                                 They ascend mountains, they go
                  down vallies ; to the place which thou hast founded for them.
              9 Thou has set a bound which they shall not pass; nor shall
                  they return to cover the earth.
           10           Thou art he who sendeth forth springs in vallies.                                                    Waters
           11 shall flow down between the mountains ; and give drink to all
                  the beasts of the field.                       Wild asses will expect them to quench
           12 their thirst.                  By them the birds of the air will abide : from
           13 among the rocks they will utter a sound.                                                  Thou art he who
                  watereth mountains from his chambers.                                         With the fruit of thy
            14 works the earth will be satisfied.                                      Thou art he who causeth
                  grass to grow for cattle ; even verdant grass for the service of
            15 man.            That he may bring food out of the earth : wine cheer-
                  eth the heart of man : that he might exhilarate his countenance
            1 (3  with oil ; the heart of man is strengthened with bread.                                                          The
                  trees of the plain shall be fully satisfied—the cedars of Leba-
            17 non, which he hath planted.                                  There the birds will build their
            18 nests.             The family of the stork account them their own.                                                  The
                  lofty mountains are for the hinds ; a rock is the refuge of the
            19 choirogryllus.                   He hath appointed the moon for seasons : the
            20 sun knoweth his time for going down.                                                Thou hast stationed
                  darkness and there was night : in it all the beasts of the forest
            21 will come forth—Lions roaring for prey, seeking their food
            22 from God.                  When the sun is risen, they will assemble and
            23 lay themselves down in their dens ; Man will go forth to his
                  labour and continue at it till evening.
            24           How manifold are thy works,                                       Lord, with wisdom thou
            25 hast done them all.                          The earth is filled with thy creatures ; So
                  is the great and spacious sea : in this are moving things innu-
            26 merable—living creatures small and great.                                                  There ships sail
                  there is that dragon, which thou hast formed to sport therein.
            27 All wait on thee to give them food in due season.                                                     When thou
            28 givest them, they gather ; by opening thy hand all are bounti-
            29 fully supplied. But when thou deniest, they are troubled. With-
            30 draw their breath, they die and return to their dust : send forth
                  thy breath and they are created : thou indeed canst renew the
            31 face of the earth.                        Let the glory of the Lord endure forever
            32 let the Lord rejoice over his works.                                          When he looketh at the
                                  PSALMS.
         earth, he causeth it to tremble; when he toucheth the moun-
         tains, they smoke.
      33     I will sing to the Lord as long as I live, I will praise my
      34 God while I have a being.    Let my meditation be acceptable
      35 to him, and I will rejoice in the Lord.Let sinners be consum-
         ed from the earth, and the wicked so as to be no more ;   my
         soul, bless thou the Lord.
                                     CV.
            An Alleluia, or alternate Song of Precise to the Lorel.
       1       GIVE thanks to the Lord and invoke his name : pro-
       2 claim his works among the nations.  Sing to him and sing with
       3 instrumental musick; relate all his wonderous works.     Sing
         praises to his holy name. Let the heart of them, who seek the
       4 Lord, be glad.  Seek the Lord and be confirmed in strength ;
       5 seek his face continually.  Kemember his wonders which he
       6 hath done ; his miracles and the judgments of his mouth.   ye
         seed of Abraham, his servants—ye children of Jacob, his cho-
       7 sen ones ; he is the Lord, our God, in all this land are his judg-
       8 ments.  He remembered forever his covenant—a word which
       9 he gave in charge for a thousand generations : the covenant
         which he made with Abraham, and that oath of his to Isaak,
      10 which he confirmed to Jacob for a law, and to Israel for an
      11 everlasting covenant—saying, To thee I will give the land of
      12 Chanaan to be the lot of your inheritance.   When they were
      13 few in number—of little account and sojourners therein ; when
         they passed through from nation to nation—from one kingdom
      14 to another people ; he suffered no man to injure them—he re-
      15 proved kings for their sake, "touch not mine anointed ones,
      16 and to my prophets do no harm."   When he called for a famine
      17 on the land—broke all the stay of bread, he had sent before
      18 them a man, Joseph was sold for a servant.    They had huni-
      19 bled his feet with fetters, his life was spent in irons ; until his
      20 word came to pass—till the oracle of the Lord tried him. The
         king had sent and loosed him—the chief of peoples had set
      21 him at liberty—had appointed him lord of his house, and ruler
      22 of all his possessions ; that he like himself might instruct prin-
                                                                    —
                                 PSALMS.
      23 ces, and teach his senators wisdom : then Israel went down to
      24 Egypt, and Jacob sojourned in the land of Cham.     When he
         had encreased his people to a great degree, and made them
     25 stronger than their enemies ; and had turned their hearts to hate
      26 his people, to deal deceitfully with his servants ; he sent forth
     27 Moses his servant—Aaron whom he had chosen : to them he
         committed the words of his signs—of his wonders in the land
     28 of Cham.   He sent forth darkness and it was dark.  When they
     29 made his words bitter, he turned their waters into blood, and
     30 made a slaughter of their fishes ; their land swarmed with frogs,
     31 in the inmost chambers of their kings.   He spake and the dog
     32 fly came, and stinging gnats in all their borders ; he made his
     33 showers, hail, flaming fire in all their land ; he smote their vines
     34 and their fig trees, and broke every tree of their border.  He
         spake, and the grasshopper came, and the brouchus locust in
     35 swarms innumerable, and devoured every herb in their coun-
     36 try, and ate up the fruit of their land. Then he smote every first
     37 born of their land—the first fruits of all their labour ; and
         brought out his people with silver and gold, and there was not
     38 a feeble person among their tribes. Egypt rejoiced at their go-
     39 ing out, for the dread of these had fallen on them.  He spread
         out a cloud to shelter them, and a fire to illuminate the night
     40 for them.   They asked, and flocks of quails came ; and he sa-
     41 tisfied them with the bread of heaven. He split a rock and wa-
      42 ters gushed out, and rivers ran in dry places. Because he re-
         membered his holy promise—that which he made to Abraham
      43 his servant ; therefore he brought out his people with joy
     44 even his chosen ones with gladness ; and gave them the coun-
      45 tries of nations, and they inherited the labours of peoples ; that
         they might keep his rules of rectitude, and that they might
         diligently seek his law.
                                    CVI.
                                 An Alleluia.
       1       GIVE thanks to the Lord, for he is good ; for to ever-
       2 lasting his mercy endureth.  Who can express the mighty acts
       3 of the Lord ?  Who can publish all his praises ? Happy they,
                                                                    PSALMS.
                 4 who keep judgment, and who do justice at all times.                                                      Remem-
                     ber us,            Lord, affectionately as thy people, visit us with thy
                5 salvation ; that we may see it in the felicity of thy chosen—that
                     we may be gladdened with the joy of thy nation—that we may
                 6 sing praises with thy heritage.                                We with our fathers have sin-
                     ned; we have committed iniquity; we have done wickedly.
                 7 Our fathers minded not thy wonders in Egypt, they did not
                8 remember the multitude of thy mercies.                                               Though in coming
                     up they were refractory at the Red sea, yet he saved them for
                     his name's sake, that he might make known his mighty power.
                 9 He rebuked the Red sea and it was dried up ; and he led them
              10 through the deep as through a wilderness; and saved them
                     from the hand of those who hated them, and delivered them
              11 out of an enemy's hand.                             The water covered those who afflicted
              12 them, not an individual of them was left.                                                Though they be-
              13 lieved his words, though they sang his praise ; they soon forgot
              14 his works, they waited not for his counsel.                                                 They indulged a
                     longing desire in the desert, and tried God in a place without
              15 water.             Though he granted them their request, and sent satiety
              16 to their soul                 yet they provoked Moses in the camp and Aaron
                                            ;
              17 the consecrated of the Lord.                                 The earth opened and swallowed
              18 up Dathan, and covered the company of Abeiron; and a fire
                     was kindled in their assembly, and a flame burned up the wick-
               19 ed.         Even at Choreb they made a calf, and worshipped the
              20 graven image; and exchanged their glory for the image of an
              21 ox which eateth grass. They forgot God their saviour, who
              22 had done great things in Egypt—wonderful things in the land
              23 of Cham, and terrible things at the Red sea: whereupon he
                     spake of destroying them, had not his chosen Moses stood be-
                     fore him in the breach, to turn him from his fierce indignation,
                     that he might not utterly destroy.
              24           When they despised the pleasant land and did not con-
              25 fide in his word: but murmured in their tents; and hearkened
              26 not to the voice of the Lord: he lifted up his hand against
              27 them ; to overthrow them in the desert ; and cast back their
                     seed among the nations ; and disperse them in the countries.
              28 When they consecrated themselves to Belphegor ; and ate the
              29 sacrifices             offered to dead men ; and provoked him with their
              30 devices ; and the plague was raging among them : Phineas
                                                                                                                                      :;
                                                              PSALMS.
               stood up and made atonement ; and the plague was stayed
        31 and it was counted to him for righteousness to all generations
        32 forever.             When they provoked him at the water of strife it went
        33 ill with Moses on their account.                                    For they provoked his spirit
        34 and he spake unadvisedly with his lips.                                           They did not root out
        35 the nations which the Lord had mentioned to him : but min-
        36 gled with those nations ; and learned their works.                                                    And served
               their graven images which became to them a stumbling block.
        37 They actually sacrificed their sons and their daughters to de-
        38 mons : and shed innocent blood—the blood of their sons and
               daughters, whom they sacrificed to the graven idols of Cha-
        39 naan.             And the land was polluted with blood and defiled by
              their works :                and they went a whoring with their devices.
        40 Therefore the Lord was incensed against his people, and ab-
        41 horred his inheritance.                            And he delivered them into the hands
        42 of enemies ; and they who hated them ruled over them.                                                            When
               their enemies afflicted them ; and they were humbled under
        43 their hands : many a time did he deliver them.                                                    But they pro-
        44 voked him with their counsel.                                      When they were humbled for
               their iniquities ; the Lord beheld when they were afflicted.
         45 When he heard their supplication, he remembered his cove-
         46 nant and according to the multitude of his mercies ; he relent-
               ed and excited compassion for them among all those who had
         47 captivated them.                      Save us,             Lord, our God ; and gatherus from
               among the nations ; that we may give thanks to thy holy name
         48 —that we may triumph in thy praise.                                               Blessed be the Lord
               the God of Israel from everlasting to everlasting : and let all
               the people say, Amen, Amen.
                                                                   CVIL
                                                             An Alleluia,
           1               GIVE thanks to the Lord, for he is good : for to ever-
           2 lasting his mercy endureth.                                Let this be said by them whom
               the Lord hath redeemed—whom he hath redeemed from an
           3 enemy's hand—whom he hath gathered out of the countries
           4 from the east and west and north and sea.                                               They had wander-
                ed in the desert in a land without water; they found no way
                                   PSALMS.
         5 to a city of habitation.They were hungry and thirsty.    Their
        6 soul within them fainted : then they cried to the Lord in their
        7 affliction; and he delivered them from their distresses: and
           conducted them to a straight road ; that they might go to a city
           of habitation.
        8     O let them praise the Lord for his mercies ; and for his
        9 wonderful dealings with the sons of men : because he hath sa-
           tisfied the longing soul ; and filled the hungry with good things.
       10     As for them who sat in darkness and the shadow of
       11 death ; bound with affliction and irons ; because they rebel-
           led against the oracles of God ; and contemned the counsel of
       12 the Most High : when their heart was brought low by troubles
       13 —when they were weak and there was no helper : then they
           cried to the Lord in their affliction; and he saved them from
       14 their distresses; and brought them out of darkness and the
           shadow of death ; and burst their chains asunder.
       15        let them praise the Lord for his mercies, and for his
       10 wonderful dealings with the sons of men ; for he hath dashed
           to shivers the gates of brass, and broken asunder the bars of
          iron.
       17     He helped them out of the way of their transgression :
       18 for on account of their iniquities they were brought low.Their
          soul abhorred all manner of food, and they drew near to the
       19 gates of death. Then they cried to the Lord in their affliction,
       20 and he saved them from their distresses.    He sent forth his
           word and healed them ; and delivered them from their destruc-
           tions.
       21     O let them praise the Lord for his mercies, and for his
       22 wonderful dealings with the sons of men ; and let them offer him
           a sacrifice of thanksgiving, and publish his works with joy.
       23     As for them who go to sea in ships, and traffick on the mighty
       24 waters—they see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in
       25 the deep.   He spake, and up rose a tempestuous wind : and its
       26 waves are lifted high ; they mount up to the heavens : then down
       27 they descend into the depths ; with perils, their souls are
           melted ;—they reel and stagger like one drunk, and all their
       28 skill is swallowed up.  Then they cried to the Lord in their af-
       29 fliction, and he brought them out of their distresses.  He re-
           buked the tempest, and it stopt in a still calm ; and its waves
       30 were lulled to silence.   And they were glad, because they
                                                                                          PSALMS.
                     were at rest.                            And he conducted them to their desired port.
            31              let them praise the Lord for his mercies, and for his won-
            32 derful dealings with the sons of men.                                                                                     Let them extol him
                     in the congregation of the people : and praise him in the assem-
                     bly of Elders.
            33                 He hath turned rivers into a wilderness : and outlets of
            34 water into a thirsty land—a fruitful country into barren-
            35 ness :                   for the wickedness of them who dwell therein.                                                                                                     He
                     hath turned a desert into pools of water, and a thirsty soil into
            36 water springs : and caused the hungry to dwell there.                                                                                                                   And
            37 they have erected abiding cities : and have sown fields and
                      planted vineyards, which have yielded them the fruits of in-
             38 crease.                      And he hath blessed them and they have multiplied
             39 greatly, and their cattle have not decreased.                                                                                        Again they have
                      been diminished, and brought low by oppressions, afflictions,
             40 and sorrow.                                 Contempt hath been poured on their princes : and
             41 he hath caused them to wander in a trackless desert. Then out
                       of affliction he hath helped the needy, and hath made families
                       like a flock.
             42                 Let the righteous see and rejoice, and let all iniquity stop
              43 its mouth.                               Whosoever is wise and will observe these things,
                       he will understand the mercies of the Lord.
                                                                                               CVIIL
                                                               An Ode of a Psalm, by David.
                  1              MY heart is prepared,                                                        God, my heart is prepared ; I
                  2 will sing and play on what is my glory.                                                                                   Awake psaltery and
                 3 kithara, I myself will awake early.                                                                     I will give thanks to thee,
                        O Lord, among peoples—among nations I will resound thy
                 4 praise ;                    for thy mercy is great above the heavens, and thy
                  5 truth reacheth to the clouds.                                                             Be thou,                          God, exalted above
                        the heavens ; and over all the earth thy glory.
                  6               That thy beloved may be delivered, save with thy right
                  7 handandanswer me.                                                God hath spoken in his sanctuary, I shall
                        be exalted, and divide Sikima, and measure out the valley of
                  8 tents.                   Galaad is mine and mine is Manasses ; and Ephraim is
                   9 the support of my head : Juda is my king.                                                                                    Moab, the cauldron
                         <>f my hope.                            Over Idtunea I shall extend my march: to me
                                   vol. n.                                        .                    j    i
                                                                                             —;:
                                              PSALMS.
         10 the Philistines are subjected.              Who will conduct me to the
         11 strong city—who will guide me to Idumea ?                     Wilt not thou, O
              God, who didst cast us off              Wilt not thou,            God, go out
                                                   —
         12 with our armies?            Grant us help because of affliction; safety
         13 from man is indeed vain.             Through God we can exert power
              he can make our enemies contemptible.
                                                 CIX.
                          For the conclusion.       A Psalm by David.
           1          GOD, pass not by my praise in silence : for against me
           2 the mouth of a sinner ; and the mouth of the deceitful is open-
              ed.   They have spoken against me with a deceitful tongue.
          3 With words of hatred they encompassed me about ; and fought
          4 against me without provocation. They traduced me for my
           5 love ;   but I prayed, when they were rendering me evil for
          (3 good, and hatred for my love.            " Set a sinner over him ; and let
          7 an accuser stand at his right hand.              When he is judged let him
             be condemned ; and let his supplication be deemed an offence.
          8 Let his days be few ; and let another take his office.                    Let his
           9 children be fatherless and his wife a widow.                  Let his sons be
         10 vagabonds and beg : let them be cast out from their dwellings.
         11 Let an extortioner seize all that he hath ; and strangers make
         12 spoil of his labours.        Let there be none to help him ; nor any
         13 to compassionate his orphan children.                 Let his children be for
             destruction—In one generation let his name be blotted out.
         14 Let the iniquity of his fathers be remembered before the Lord
         15 and let not the sin of his mother be blotted out.                  Let them be
             continually before the Lord.           And let the memorial of them be
         16 cut off from the earth : because he did not remember to shew
              mercy ; but persecuted a man needy and afflicted : to put to
         17 death one who was broken hearted.                  As he loved cursing, let
             it come on him : as he delighted not in blessing let it be far
         18 from him.         As he clothed himself with cursing as with a man-
             tle ; and it came like water in his bowels ; and like oil into
         19 his bones : let it be to him as the mantle which covereth him :
             and as the girdle with which he is continually girded."
         20       From the Lord is this work of them who traduce me : and of
         21 them who speak evil against my soul.                 Do thou,        Lord, Lord,
                                PSALMS.
         deal with me for thy name's sake : for thy mercy is good.
      22 Deliver me, for I am afflicted and needy ; and my heart is
      23 troubled within me.  Like a declining shadow I have glided
      24 away ;—I have been shaken off like locusts.   My knees are
         weakened by fasting ; and my flesh is changed for want of oil.
      25 As for me, I became their scoff ; they beheld me—they shaked
      26 their heads. Help me,     Lord, my God : and save me ac-
      27 cording to thy mercy.  Let them know that this is thy hand ;
      28 and that thou ;   Lord hast done this.  Let them curse, thou
         indeed wilt bless. Let them who rise up against me be put to
      29 shame : but let thy servant be made glad. Let them who tra-
         duce me, be clothed with shame : let them be covered with
      30 their shame as with a mantle.  With my mouth I will greatly
         thank the Lord ; and praise him in the midst of many : be-
      31 cause he stood at the right of the needy : to save from them
         who seek my life.
                                    CX.
                            A Psalm. By David.
       1    THE Lord said to my Lord ; sit at my right hand ; till I
       2 make thine enemies thy footstool.  Out of Sion the Lord will
         send thee a rod of power : rule thou in the midst of thine ene-
       3 mies.  With thee shall be the government ; in the day of thy
         power—in the splendours of thy holies from the womb : be-
       4 fore the morning star I begot thee. The Lord hath sworn and
         will not change ; thou art a priest forever, after the order of
       5 Melchisedek.  The Lord at thy right hand hath crushed kings
       6 in the day of his wrath.He will judge among the nations : he
         will multiply slaughters : he will crush the heads of many on
       7 the earth.  He will drink of the brook in the way : therefore
         he will lift up the head.
                                   CXI.
                               An Alleluia.
       1     I WILL praise thee,      Lord, with my whole heart ; in
       2 the counsel of the upright and the congregation.  The works
         of the Lord are great ; exquisitely contrived for all his purpo-
                                                     — —                                                           ;
                                                       PSALMS.
             3 ses.      Thanksgiving and majesty, his work and his righteous-
            4 ness shall endure forever.                     He hath made a memorial of his
             5 wonders : merciful and gracious is the Lord.                                 He hath given
                food to them that fear him : he will remember his covenant
             6 forever.         He hath shewn his people the power of his works
             7 by giving them possession of nations.                           The works of his hands
                are truth and judgment: all his commandments are faithful.
             8 They are firmly established forever : they are done with truth
             9 and uprightness.               He hath sent redemption for his people;
                he hath enjoined his covenant forever : holy and awful is his
           10 name.          The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom;
                and all who practise it have good understanding.                                       Let the
                praise of him endure forever.
                                                          CXII.
                                                      An Alleluia.
             1        HAPPY the man who feareth the Lord! in his command-
             2 ments he will greatly delight.                       His seed shall be mighty in
            3 the land : the generation of the upright shall be blessed.                                   Glory
                and riches are in his house ; and his righteousness shall en-
             4 dure forever.           To the upright light sprang up in darkness.                             He
            5 is merciful, compassionate and just ; a beneficent man who
                commiserateth and lendeth.                      He will manage his affairs with
             6 judgment ; because he is never to be shaken ; the righteous
             7 shall be in everlasting remembrance : at bad news he will
                not be terrified :           his heart is prepared to trust in the Lord.
             8 His heart is established, he could not be terrified; even when
             9 he beheld his enemies.                   He hath dispersed, he hath given to
           10 the needy ; his righteousness shall endure forever.                                     His horn
                shall be gloriously exalted: the wicked shall see and be en-
                raged.       Let him gnash his teeth and pine away ; the desire of
                the wicked shall perish.
                                                                                                                          ;;:
                                                         PSALMS.
                                                           CXIII.
                                                       An Alleluia.
          1              PKAISE the Lord, ye his servants! praise the name
          2 of the Lord.              Let the name of the Lord be blessed ; henceforth
          3 and forever.               From the rising of the sun to its going down
          4 let the name of the Lord be praised.                                   The Lord is high over
          5 all the nations : his glory is above the heavens.                                          Who is like
          6 the Lord our G-od who dwelleth on high, and superintended
          7 the things below him in heaven and on the earth ?                                             Who rais-
              eth the distressed from the ground, and lifteth the needy from
          8 a dunghill: to seat him with princes; with the chiefs of his
          9 people.           Who settleth the barren woman in a family making
              her a joyful mother of children.
                                                            CXIV.
                                                       An Alleluia.
          1         AT the departure of Israel from Egypt: of the house of
          2 Jacob from a barbarous people ; Judea became his sanctuary
          3 Israel his dominion.                    The sea saw and fled : Jordan was turned
          4 back.          The mountains skipped like rams : the hills, like lambs
          5 of the flock. What ailed thee, sea, that thou fleddest ? And thee,
          6 Jordan, that thou turnedst back?                                  You, mountains, that you
              skipped like rams? And you, hills, like lambs of the flock?
          7 The earth was moved at the presence of the Lord ; at the pre-
           8 sence of the God of Jacob : who turned the rocks into pools of
               water : and into fountains of water, the flinty rock.
                                                             cxv.
           1        NOT unto us,                  Lord; not unto us.                  But to thy name only
           2 give the glory : for thy mercy and for thy truth.                                         Perhaps the
           3 nations may say, Where is their God ?                                    Our God is in heaven
               and on earth : all that he willed, he hath done.
           4        The idols of the nations are silver and gold; the workman-
           o ship of men's hands.                     They have a mouth but cannot speak
                                                                        !                                                                                 :
                                                                           PSALMS.
                  6 though they have eyes, they cannot see.                                                      Ears they have, but
                 7 they cannot hear : having nostrils they cannot smell.                                                                        They
                      have hands but they cannot feel :                                              They have feet, but they
                      cannot walk : nor can they utter a sound with their throat.
                 8           Let them who make them be like them ; and all who
                  9 have trusted in them.                               The house of Israel have trusted in the
               10 Lord : he is their helper and protector.                                                      The house of Aaron
                      have trusted in the Lord ; he is their helper and protector.
               11 They who fear the Lord have trusted in him : he is their helper
                      and protector.
               12            The Lord hath remembered us and blessed us : he hath
                      blessed the house of Israel : he hath blessed the house of
               13 Aaron : he hath blessed them, who fear the Lord, both small
               14 and great.                    May the Lord add to you more and more—to you
               15 and to your children                                  May you be blessed by the Lord : who
                      made the heaven and the earth.
               16             To the Lord belongeth the heaven of heavens : and he hath
               17 given the earth to the sons of men.                                                    The dead cannot praise
                      thee, O Lord; nor any who go down to the mansion of the
               18 dead : but we who are alive will bless the Lord ; from this time
                      forth and forever.
                                                                              CXVI.
                                                                        An Alleluia.
                  1           I AM full of love, because the Lord will hear the voice of
                  2 my supplication.                          Because to me he inclined his ear : therefore
                  3 in my days I will invoke him.                                         The pangs of death encompass-
                       ed me ; the perils of Hades found me : I met with distress and
                  4 sorrow : thereupon I invoked the name of the Lord;                                                                            Lord
                  5 deliver my soul.                           The Lord is gracious and righteous; mer-
                  6 ciful indeed is our God.                                      The Lord preserveth the sincere
                  7 I was brought low but he saved me.                                                    Keturn,                  my soul, to
                  8 thy rest : for the Lord hath dealt kindly with thee.                                                            Because he
                       hath delivered my soul from death ; mine eyes from tears and
                  9 my feet from falling : I will worship before the Lord in the land
                10 of the living.                      Alleluia
                11                 I believed therefore I spake; for I was brought very
                12 low : and in my perturbation I said, Every man is a liar.
                                                                                         !                  !
                                                                    PSALMS.
           13 What shall I render to the Lord ; for all that he hath done
                  for me ?             I will take the cup of thanksgiving ; and invoke
          14 the name of the Lord.                                   I will pay my vows to the Lord ; in the
          15 presence of all his people.                                     At a high rate ; in the sight of the
          16 Lord ; is estimated the death of his saints.                                                       Lord I am thy ser-
                  vant—I am thy servant and the son of thy handmaid.                                                                         Thou
          17 hast burst my bonds asunder : to thee I will offer a sacrifice of
          18 praise and call on the name of the Lord.                                                     I will pay my vows to
          19 the Lord ; in the presence of all his people—in the courts of the
                  house of the Lord—in the midst of thee, Jerusalem.
                                                                         CXYIT.
                                                                    An Alleluia.
                              O PEAISE the Lord, all ye nations
                                   Praise him all ye peoples
                              For his kindness is exerted for us,
                                   And the truth of the Lord will endure forever.
                                                                        CXVIII.
                                                                    An Alleluia.
             1           O GIVE thanks to the Lord, for he is good: for to ever-
             2 lasting his mercy endureth.                                              !   let the house of Israel say,
             3 For he is good.                           For to everlasting his mercy endureth.                                                        !
                 let the house of Aaron say, For he is good.                                                      For to everlasting
            4 his mercy endureth.                               Let all who fear the Lord say, For he is
             5 good.             For to everlasting his mercy endureth.                                                  Because of af-
                 fliction I called on the Lord , and he heard me for enlargement.
             6 Having the Lord for my helper, I will not fear what man can do
             7 to me.               Having the Lord for my helper, I shall look down on
             8 mine enemies.                       It is better to confide in the Lord than to confide
             9 in man; it is better to trust the Lord than put confidence in
           10 princes.                All the nations compassed me about : but by the name
           11 of the Lord I was avenged of them.                                                Compassing me about they
                  beset me, but by the name of the Lord I was avenged of them.
           12 They encompassed me as bees do a honey comb : and blazed
                  furiously like fire among thorns ;—but by the name of the
               7                                                                                                                 :;
                                                               PSALMS.
             13 Lord I was avenged of them.                              Being hard pressed, I was on the
             14 point of falling : but the Lord himself supported me.                                                     The
                   Lord is my strength and my song of praise—he indeed was
             15 my salvation.—A sound of joy and deliverance in the tents
                   of the righteous !                The right hand of the Lord hath exerted
             16 power !            The right hand of the Lord hath exalted me ; the right
             1     hand of the Lord hath exerted power.                                I shall not die : but live
             18 and proclaim the works of the Lord.                                  With correction, the Lord
             19 corrected me : but did not deliver me up to death.                                                Open for
                   me the gates of righteousness, and I will go in at them and
             20 give thanks to the Lord.                         This is the gate of the Lord, at it the
             21 righteous are to enter.                    I will praise thee because thou didst hear
             22 me, and hast been unto me salvation.                                         The stone which the
                   builders rejected, was the very one for the head of the corner.
             23 This [salvation] was from the Lord, and it is wonderful in our
             24 eyes.          This is the day which the Lord made : on it let us rejoice
             25 and be glad.                     Lord save, I beseech thee :                          Lord, I beseech
             26 thee, prosper.                Blessed be he who is coming in the name of the
             27 Lord; we have blessed you of the house of the Lord.                                                   God is
                   Lord, and he hath shined upon us.                                  Solemnize a festival with
              28 thick boughs, even to the horns of the altar.                                      Thou art my God
                   and I will praise thee ; thou art my God and I will exalt thee
                    I will praise thee, because thou hast heard me ; and hast been
              29 unto me salvation.                         give thanks to the Lord, for he is good
                    for to everlasting his mercy endureth.
                                                                  CXIX.
                                                             An Alleluia.
                          HAPPY                                  ALEPH.
                1                          the linden"led in the way ! who walk in the law of
                2 the Lord.              Happy they who search his testimonies, and seek
                3 him with their whole heart : for they are not workers of iniqui-
                4 ty—they have walked in his ways.                                      Thou hast enjoined the
                 5 strict observance of thy precepts.                                  that my ways may be di-
                 6 rected, that I may keep thy rules of rectitude.                                        Then I cannot
                     be put to shame, when I have respect to all thy command-
                 7 ments.           I will praise thee with uprightness of heart, when 1
                                PSALMS.
      8 have learned thy righteous judgments.    I will keep thy judg-
        ments,   forsake me not utterly.
                                  BETH.
      9    By what can a youth make his way prosperous ?     By keep-
     10 ing thy words.   I have sought thee with my whole heart ; let
     11 me not be driven from thy commandments.      I have hid thine
     12 oracles in my heart, that I may not sin against thee.    Lord,
     13 thou art blessed, teach me thy rules of rectitude.With my lips
     14 I have declared all the judgments of thy mouth.   I have been
        delighted with the way of thy testimonies, as for all manner of
     15 riches. I will talk continually of thy commandments, and be
     16 attentive to thy ways.  I will meditate on thy judgments and
        not forget thy words.
                                 GIMEL.
     17    Make retribution to thy servant ; that I may live and keep
     18 thy words.   Open mine eyes, that I may discern the wonder-
     19 ous things of thy law.  I am a sojourner in this land, hide not
     20 thy commandments from me.      My soul is engaged in a conti-
     21 nual longing for thy judgments. Thou hast rebuked the haugh-
     22 ty ; cursed are they who turn aside from thy commands.     Ke-
        move from me reproach and contempt, since I have earnestly
     23 sought thy testimonies.  For chiefs sat and spoke against me,
     24 but thy servant meditated on thy statutes ; for thy testimonies
        are my study, thy statutes, my counsellors.
                                DALETH.
     25     My soul cleaveth to the ground; keep me alive according
     26 to thy word. I have declared thy ways and thou hast heard me ;
     27 teach me thy rules of rectitude. Instruct me in the way of thy
     28 statutes, and I will meditate on thy wonders ; my soul drooped
     29 with heaviness ; strengthen me with thy words.   Eemove from
        me the way of injustice, and graciously favour me with thy
     30 law.  I have chosen the way of truth, and have not forgotten
     31 thy judgments; I have cleaved, O Lord, to thy testimonies;
     32   let me not be put to shame.    I ran in the way of thy com-
        mandments, when thou didst enlarge my heart.
                                   HE.
     33     Teach me,     Lord, the way of thy statutes, and in every
     34 occurrence I will seek it. Give me understanding that I may
     35 search thy law, and keep it with my whole heart.  Lead me in
            VOL. II.                k k
                                                                                                                                           ;
                                                                     PSALMS.
                     the path of thy commandments; for I have delighted therein.
               36 Incline my heart to thy testimonies and not to covetousness.
               37 Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity—keep me alive
               38 in thy way.                 Confirm thine oracle to thy servant that thou mayst
               39 be feared.                Take away my reproach which I dreaded, because
               40 thy judgments are good.                                Behold I have longed for thy pre-
                     cepts ; quicken me by thy saving goodness.
                                                                        VAU.
              41                 Lord, let thy mercy come upon me—thy salvation ac-
              42 cording to thy word ; and to them who reproach me I will
              43 make answer, that I have trusted in thy words.                                                    And take not
                     the word of truth entirely from my mouth, for I have trusted
              44 in thy judgments; and I will keep thy law continually forever
              45 and ever.                 I indeed have walked in a roomy place, because I
              46 diligently sought thy precepts ; and I have spoken of thy testi-
              47 monies before kings, and was not ashamed : and have medi-
                     tated on thy commandments, in which I took great delight
              48 and have held up my hands for thy precepts which I loved,
                    and meditated on thy rules of rectitude.
                                                                      ZAIJNT.
              49           Kemember thy words to thy servant, for which thou hast
              50 caused me to hope ; this hath comforted me in mine affliction,
              51 for thine oracle kept me alive.                                  The haughty transgressed to a
              52 great degree, but from thy law I turned not aside.                                                           Lord, I
              53 remembered thy judgments of old and was comforted.                                                            Horror
                    seized me on the account of sinners—of them who utterly for-
              54 sake thy law.                    Thy statutes were the subject of my songs, in
              55 the place of my pilgrimage. I remembered thy name,                                                               Lord,
             56 in the night, and have kept thy law.                                           This was my condition,
                    because I diligently sought thy statutes.
                                                                    CHETH.
             57           Thou,             Lord, art my portion; I have determined to keep
             58 thy law.                With my whole heart I have entreated thy favour,
             59 be gracious to me according to thy word.                                              I revolved thy ways
             60 in my mind, and turned my feet to thy testimonies.                                                      I prepared
                    myself and was not troubled, to keep thy commandments.
             61 The cords of sinners entangled me ; but I did not forget thy
             62 law. At midnight I arose to give thee thanks ; because of thy
             63 righteous judgments.                           I am a companion of all them who fear
                                                                PSALMS.
          64 thee ; and of them who keep thy commandments.                                                              Lord the
                earth is full of thy mercy, teach me thy statutes.
                                                                   TETH.
          65                 Lord, thou hast dealt kindly with thy servant ; accord-
          66 ing to thy word.                      Teach me kindness and discipline and know-
          67 ledge ; because I have believed thy commandments.                                                           Before I
                was afflicted, I transgressed; for this cause I have kept thy
          68 word.            Thou,            Lord, art good ; in thy goodness teach me thy
          69 statutes.              The iniquity of the proud was multiplied against me :
          70 but I with my whole heart will search thy precepts.                                                               Their
          71 heart was curdled like milk : but I meditated on thy law.                                                               It
                is good for me that thou hast humbled me : that I might learn
          72 thy rules of rectitude.                           The law of thy mouth is better to me
                than thousands of gold and silver.
                                                                    JOD.
          73           Thy hands have made me and fashioned me : instruct me
          74 that I may learn thy commandments.                                             They who fear thee will
                be glad when they see me ; because I have trusted in thy
         75 words.              I know,              Lord, that thy judgments are just : and that
         76 thou with truth hast humbled me.                                                !   let thy mercy be my
         77 comfort, according to thy word to thy servant.                                                   Let thy tender
                mercies come to me that I may live ; for thy law is my delight.
         78 Let the proud be ashamed, because they have unjustly in-
         79 jured me.                 But let me meditate on thy precepts.                                    Let them who
                fear thee turn to me—and them who know thy testimonies.
         80 Let my heart be sound in thy statutes, that I may not be
                shamed.
                                                                   CAPH.
         81           My soul fainteth for thy salvation; I trusted in thy words.
         82 Mine eyes failed for thy promise, saying, When wilt thou
         83 comfort me?                     Though I became like a leathern bag in frost ; I
         84 did not forget thy statutes.                                  How many are the days of thy
                servant ?           When wilt thou avenge me of my persecutors?
         S5 Transgressors told me idle tales : but thy law O Lord, taught
         86 me otherwise.                     All thy commandments are truth.                                     They perse-
         87 cuted me without cause, do thou assist me.                                                They have almost
                finished me on the earth ; but I did not forsake thy precepts.
         88 According to thy mercy quicken me : that I may keep the tes-
                timonies of thy mouth.
                                                                 PSALMS.
                                                                  LAMED.
            89                 Lord, thy word will endure in heaven forever—thy
            90 truth to all generations.                           Thou hast established the earth and it
            91 shall continue.                   By thy arrangement day shall continue : for all
            92 things are in subjection to thee.                                     Had not thy law been my
            93 study, I should have perished in my affliction.                                                  Let me never
                  forget thy rules of rectitude : for by them thou hast kept me
            94 alive.           I am thine,                save me : for I have diligently sought thy
            95 statutes.              Sinners lay in wait for me to destroy me : I under-
            96 stood thy testimonies.                            Of all perfection I saw a limit; thy
                   command is very broad.
                                                                     MEM.
            97                 !   how I have loved thy law,                               Lord !         It is my medita-
            98       tion all the day.                 Thou hast given me a knowledge of thy law
            99       above mine enemies; because it is mine forever.                                                 I had more
                     understanding than all my teachers : because thy testimonies
             100 are my study.                     I understood more than elders : because I di-
             101 ligently sought thy commandments.                                               From every evil way
             102 I restrained my feet ; that I might keep thy words.                                                          I have
                     not turned aside from thy judgments : because thou didst
             103 instruct me.                   How sweet are thine oracles to my taste !                                        They
             104 are sweeter than honey to my mouth.                                               From thy precepts I
                     got understanding : Therefore I hated every wicked way.
                                                                      NUN.
             105            Thy law is a lamp to my feet; and a light to my paths.
             106 I have sworn and determined to keep thy righteous judg-
             107 ments.               I have been exceedingly afflicted : quicken me,
             108 Lord, according to thy word.                                        Accept, O Lord, I beseech
                      thee, the freewill offerings of my mouth : and teach me thy
             109 judgments.                   My life is continually in thy hands; and I have
             110 not forgotten thy law.                             The wicked laid a snare for me : but
             111 I erred not from thy precepts.                                     I have taken thy testimonies
                      for an everlasting inheritance : for they are the joy of my
              112 heart.            I inclined my heart to perform thy statutes ; for the sake
                      of an everlasting reward.
                                                                   SAMECH.
              113            I have hated transgressors and loved thy law.                                                 Thou art
              114 my helper and my protector : I have hoped for thy words.
              1.15 Away from me ye evil doers, for I will diligently seek the
                                                                                                                                        ;
                                                                PSALMS.
          116 cornraandinents of my God.                                      Uphold me according to thy
                   word and keep me alive ; and let me not be shamed for mine
          117 expectation.                   Help me and I shall be saved; and I will medi-
          118 tate continually on thy statutes.                                    Thou hast set at naught all
                   who apostatize                   from thy statutes ;                       because their inward
          119 thought is wicked.                          All the sinners of the land I accounted
          120 transgressors; therefore I loved thy testimonies.                                                        Penetrate
                  my flesh with the dread of thee ; for I am terrified at thy
                  judgments.
                                                                    AIN.
          121            I have done what is right and just ;                                          deliver me not up
          122 to mine oppressors.                           Be surety for thy servant for good—let
          123 not the proud oppress me.                                 Mine eyes have failed looking for
                  thy salvation, and for the promise of thy saving goodness.
          124 Deal with thy servant according to thy mercy, and teach me
          125 thy statutes.                   I am thy servant, give me understanding, that
          126 I may know thy testimonies.                                   It is time to act for the Lord
          127 they have made void thy law.                                    For this cause I loved thy com-
          128 mandments more than gold or the topaz.                                                For this cause I di-
                  rected my course to all thy commandments : I hated every
                  evil way.
                                                                      PE.
          129            Thy testimonies are wonderful ; therefore my soul sought
          130 them diligently.                        The manifestation of thy words will enlight-
          131 en, and make the simple wise.                                    I opened my mouth and pant-
          132 ed, because I longed for thy commandments.                                                           Look down
                   upon me, and be gracious to me, as thou art to them who love
          133 thy name.                   Order my steps according to thy word, and let no
          134 iniquity have dominion over me.                                       Deliver me from the oppres-
          135 sion of men, and I will keep thy precepts.                                          Let thy countenance
          136 shine on thy servant ; and teach me thy statutes.                                                       Mine eyes
                  poured down streams of water, because I did not keep thy law.
                                                                TSADDI.
          137            Thou,            Lord, art righteous; and thy judgments are right.
          138 Thou hast strictly enjoined as thy testimonies, righteousness
          139 and truth.                  My zeal for thee hath consumed me ; because mine
          140 enemies forgot thy words.                                  Thy word is very pure ; and thy
          141 servant hath loved it.                           Young and despised as I am, I have not
          142 forgot thy precepts.                              Thy righteousness is an everlasting
                                                                                                                            ;
                                                           PSALMS.
           143 righteousness, and thy law is truth.                                 When affliction and dis-
           144 tress found me, thy commandments were my study; thy tes-
                  timonies are everlasting righteousness ; give me understand-
                  ing and I shall live.
                                                              KOPH.
          145           I have cried with my whole heart, O Lord, hear me ; I
          146 will diligently seek thy statutes.                              I have cried to thee,                   save
          147 me ; and I will keep thy testimonies.                                 I awoke before the dawn
                  of the morning, and cried ; on thy words I placed my hope.
          148 Mine eyes were awake before the morning dawn, that I might
          149 meditate on thine oracles.                           Hear my voice,                  Lord, according
                  to thy mercy—according to thy judgment keep me alive.
          150 They, who persecute me unjustly, drew near; but they were
          151 far removed from thy law.                               Thou,           Lord, art near, and all
          152 thy ways are truth.                       I knew of old from thy testimonies, that
                  thou hast founded them forever.
                                                              KESH.
          153           Behold my affliction, and deliver me ; for I have not for-
          154 gotten thy law.                   Plead my cause and deliver me; on account
          155 of thy word keep me alive.                              Salvation is far from sinners, be-
          156 cause they did not seek thy statutes.                                   Thy tender mercies,
                  Lord, are many; quicken me according to thy judgment.
          157 Many are my persecutors and mine enemies ; yet from thy
          158 testimonies I have not declined.                                 I beheld transgressors and
          159 was grieved; because they did not keep thy words.                                               Consider,
                  O Lord, that I have loved thy commandments : in thy mercy
          160 keep me alive.                   The beginning of thy words was truth, and
                  all thy righteous judgments endure forever.
                                                            SCHIN.
          161           Chiefs persecuted me undeservedly: but my heart stood
          162 in awe of thy words.                      Let me exult with joy for thine oracles
          163 as one who findeth great spoils.                            I have hated and abominated
          1 64 iniquity : but thy law I have loved.                                 Seven times a day have
          165 I praised thee, for thy righteous judgments.                                              Great peace
                  have they who love thy law : and for them there is no stum-
          166 bling block.                 I have waited,                  Lord, for thy salvation; and
          167 have loved thy commandments.                                  My soul hath kept thy tes-
          168 timonies and hath loved them exceedingly.                                         I have kept thy
                  commandments and thy testimonies : for all my ways,
                  Lord, are before thee.
                                                                              —                                                                                            :
                                                                                  PSALMS.
                                                                                       TAU.
              169                      Lord, let my prayer come before thee : give me under-
              170 standing according to thy word.                                                            Let my supplication come
                         before thee,                            Lord.             According to thy word deliver me.
              171 Let my lips solemnly utter a hymn ; when thou hast taught
              172 me thy statutes.                                  Let my tongue resound thine oracles; for all
              173 thy commandments are righteous.                                                               Let thy hand be near to
              174 save me : because I have chosen thy statutes.                                                                                 Lord, I have
                         longed earnestly for thy salvation : and thy law is my study.
              175 Let my soul live and praise thee ; and thy judgments be my
              176 support.                       Like a lost sheep I have gone astray: O seek thy
                         servant ; since I have not forgotten thy commandments.
                                                                                      cxx.
                                                                      A Song of the steps.
                 1            IN my distress I cried to the Lord ; and he hearkened to
                2 me.                     Lord, deliver my soul from false lips, and from a de-
                3 ceitful tongue.                             What should be given thee?                                                 Or what return
                4 made thee for a deceitful tongue ?                                                       Arrows of the mighty sharp-
                 5 ened with devouring coals.                                                 Ah woe is me that my sojourn
                      is     so long protracted—That I have dwelt with the tents of
                 6 Kedar—That my soul hath so long dwelt with them, who
                 7 hate peace.                        I was for peace ; but when I spoke they attacked
                      me without provocation.
                                                                                     CXXI.
                                                                      A Song of the steps.
                 1            I HAVE lifted up mine eyes to the mountains, from which
                 2 my help is to come.                                   My help is from the Lord, who made the
                 3 heaven and the earth.                                               let him not suffer my feet to stuni-
                 4 ble :            nor let him, who keepeth me, slumber.                                                                    Lo !         he who
                 5 keepeth Israel, will neither slumber nor sleep.                                                                         The Lord will
                      keep thee !                     The Lord at thy right hand will be thy shelter
                 6 the sun by day shall not scorch thee ; nor shall the moon hurt
                 7 thee by night.                             May the Lord preserve thee from all evil ! the
                                                                       —:
                                   PSALMS.
        8 Lord will keep thy soul.    The Lord will guard thy coming
          in and going out henceforth and forever.
                                    CXXII.
                              A Song of the steps.
        1    I WAS rejoiced when they said to me ; "Let us go to
        2 the house of the Lord."   Our feet have been standing in thy
        3 courts,   Jerusalem.  Jerusalem is built like a city ; with re-
          gard to which, the participation of it is for this very purpose
        4 for thither the tribes have come up—the tribes of the Lord,
          a testimony to Israel ; that they may give thanks to the name
        5 of the Lord : because there the thrones for judgment are set
        6 thrones for the house of David.    Pray, I beseech you, for the
          peace of Jerusalem ; and for prosperity to them who love thee.
        7    let there be peace in thine army and prosperity in thy pa-
        8 laces!  For the sake of my brethren and neighbours, I have
        9 expressed a wish of peace for thee—For the sake of the house
          of the Lord our God, I have earnestly sought thy good.
                                   CXXIIL
                              A Song of the steps.
        1     TO thee who dwellest in heaven, I have raised mine eyes.
        2 Behold ! as the eyes of servants are on the hands of their mas-
          ters—as the eyes of a maid are on the hands of her mistress, so
          are our eyes on the Lord our God, till he be gracious to us.
        3    Have mercy on us,      Lord; have mercy on us ; for we are
        4 exceedingly filled with contempt.   Our soul is filled exceed-
          ingly—we are the scoff of the prosperous and the contempt of
          the haughty.
                                   CXXIV.
                              A Song of the steps.
        1    HAD not the Lord been on our side (let Israel now say)
        2 had nut the Lord been on our side, when men rose up against
                             !
                                                                 PSALMS.
             3 us ; they might have swallowed us up alive—when their wrath
             4 was kindled against us, the water might have overwhelmed us.
             5 Our soul hath passed through a torrent.                                               Hath our soul then
             6 passed through impetuous water?                                         Blessed be the Lord, who
             7 hath not given us as a prey to their teeth !                                             Our soul hath es-
                 caped as a bird from the fowler's snare.                                            The snare was bro-
             8 ken and we have escaped.                              Our help is in the name of the Lord,
                 who made the heaven and the earth.
                                                                   CXXY.
                                                        A Song of the steps.
             1          THEY who trust in the Lord shall be like mount Sion ; he
             2 who inhabiteth Jerusalem shall never be shaken.                                                      Around her
                 are mountains ; and the Lord is around his people, from this
             3 time forth and forever ; for the Lord will not suffer the rod of
                  the wicked to be over the inheritance of the righteous ; that
                  the righteous may not stretch forth their hands to iniquities.
             4 Do good, O Lord, to the good, and to them who are upright
             5 in heart.              But them who turn aside into crooked ways, the Lord
                  will drive away with the workers of iniquity.                                               Peace be upon
                  Israel
                                                                   CXXVI.
                                                        A Song of the steps.
              1         WHEN the Lord brought back the captivity of Sion ; we
              2 were like them who are comforted.                                      Then was our mouth filled
                  with joy, and our tongue with exultation—then did they say
                  among the nations, "The Lord hath done great things for
              3 them."             The Lord hath done great things for us ; we are trans-
              4 ported with rapturous joy.                               Bring back,                 Lord, our captivity,
              5 like torrents in the south.                             Let them who sow with tears reap
              6 with rapture.                   They went step by step and wept sowing their
                  seed ;        but let them come tripping with joy, carrying their
                  sheaves.
                         VOL. II.                                        l 1
                                                                 —;:
                               PSALMS.
                                CXXVII.
                           A Song of the steps.
      1     UNLESS the Lord build the house, the builders have la-
         boured in vain. Unless the Lord guard the city, in vain hath
        the watchman watched—in vain is your early rising.
      2     Ye who eat the bread of care, rise when you have rested
      3 when he hath given his beloved sleep. Behold sons are an he-
       4 ritage of the Lord—a reward of the fruit of the womb. Like
         shafts in the hands of a mighty man, so are the sons of them
       5 who were shaken off.  Happy he who shall satisfy his desire
         with these. They shall not be put to shame, when they speak
         to their enemies in the gates.
                                CXXVIII.
                           A Song of the steps.
       1    HAPPY are all they who fear the Lord, who walk conti-
       2 nually in his ways. Thou shalt eat the labours of thy hands
       3 thou art happy and it shall be well with thee.Thy wife shall
         be in the sides of thy house, like a fruitful vine ; thy children
       4 round thy table, like olive plants.Behold thus shall the man
       5 be blessed, who habitually feareth the Lord. May the Lord
         bless thee for the sake of Sion ; and mayst thou see the good
       6 of Jerusalem all the days of thy life !And mayst thou see chil-
         dren's children !Peace be upon Israel.
                                 CXXIX.
                            A Song of the steps.
        1    Many a time have they warred against me from my youth,
        2 let Israel now say—Many a time they warred against me from
        3 my youth; they did not however prevail over me.   Upon my
          back the wicked hammered, they prolonged their iniquity
        4 the righteous Lord hath broken the necks of the wicked. Let
        6 all who hate Sion be confounded and turned back.  Let them
                                                                                                                     ;
                                                        PSALMS.
                be like a blade on the house tops, which withereth before it is
            7 pulled up, with which the reaper hath not filled his hand, nor
            8 he who gathereth the sheaves, his bosom ; so that they who
                passed by did not say, "The blessing of the Lord is upon
                you."       We have blessed you in the name of the Lord.
                                                          cxxx.
                                                A Song of the steps.
             1        OUT of depths to thee,                       Lord, I cried;              Lord, hearken
             2 to my voice : let thine ears be attentive to the sound of my
             3 prayer.         Shouldst thou,                  Lord, mark iniquities;                        Lord,
             4 who can subsist?                 Because there is forgiveness with thee, for
             5 thy name's sake, I have waited for thee,                                      Lord : my soul
             6 hath waited for thy word—my soul hath hoped for the Lord,
             7 from the morning watch till night.                        Let Israel hope in the Lord,
                for with the Lord there is mercy, and with him plenteous re-
             8 demption.            And he himself will redeem Israel from all their in-
                 iquities.
                                                         CXXXI.
                                                A Song of the steps.
             1        O LORD, my heart is not exalted, nor are mine eyes lofty
                 Nor have I exercised myself in great things : nor in things too
              2 wonderful for me.                Had I not been humble, but exalted myself
                 as a weaned child doth against its mother; how thou wouldst
              3 have retributed to my soul!                          Let Israel hope in the Lord
                 henceforth and forever.
                                                         CXXXII.
                                                 A Song of the steps.
              1             LOED, remember David, and all his meek humility;
              2 how he sware to the Lord, and made his vow to the God of
              3 Jacob : " I will not enter the lodging of my house, nor go up
                                PSALMS.
      4 to my bed of rest; nor give sleep to mine eyes or slumber to
      5 mine eyelids ; nor rest to my temples ; until I find a place for
      6 the Lord—a habitation for the God of Jacob."   Behold we had
        heard of this [ark] at Ephrata ; we found it in the fields of the
      7 forest. Let us go to his habitations ; let us worship at the place
      8 where his feet stood.  Arise,   Lord, and go up to thy rest,
      9 thou and the ark of thy holiness.   Let thy priests be clothed
        with righteousness, and thy saints shout for joy.
     10     For the sake of thy servant David, turn not away the face
     11 of thine anointed.  The Lord hath sworn a truth to David, and
        will not annul it ; of the fruit of thy body I will set on thy
     12 throne ; if thy children keep my covenant, and these my testi-
        monies, which I will teach them, their children also shall sit on
     13 thy throne forever.  For the Lord hath chosen Sion, and made
     14 choice of it for his habitation. This shall be my rest forever.
     15 Here I will dwell, for I have chosen it. With blessings I will
     16 bless her provision ; and satisfy her poor with bread.    Her
        priests I will clothe with salvation ; and her saints shall shout
     17 for joy. I will cause a horn for David to spring up there ; I
     18 have prepared a lamp for mine anointed.    His enemies I will
        clothe with shame ; but on him my crown shall flourish.
                                CXXXIII.
                            A Song of the steps.
       1    BEHOLD! what I pray you, so beautiful, or is there any
      2 thing so pleasant, as brethren dwelling in unity ? This is like
         precious ointment on the head, which floweth down to the
         beard—on the beard of Aaron, down to the hem of his robe.
      3 It is like the dew of Hermon, which descendeth on the moun-
         tains of Sion ; for there the Lord commanded the blessing,
         Life for evermore.
                                CXXXIV.
                            A Song of the steps.
      1     ATTEND! bless the Lord, all ye servants of the Lord,
                                                                                                               ;
                                                   PSALMS.
           who stand in the house of the Lord—in the courts of the house
        2 of our God.           At night, lift up your hands to the holies and bless
        3 the Lord.          May the Lord out of Sion bless thee :—he who made
           the heaven and the earth.
                                                   cxxxv.
                                                 An Alleluia.
        1        PRAISE the name of the Lord—praise the Lord, ye his ser-
        2 vants, who wait in the house of the Lord—in the courts of the
       3 house of our God.                   Praise the Lord ; for the Lord is good
       4 with instruments of musick praise his name ; for it is good. For
           the Lord hath made choice of Jacob for himself—of Israel for
       5 his peculiar treasure.                 For I know that the Lord is great, and
        6 that our Lord is above all the Gods.                         All that the Lord pleased
           he hath done in heaven and on earth : in the seas and in all the
       7 deeps.         When he brought clouds from the end of the earth ; he
        8 made lightnings for the purpose of rain.                            He it is who bringeth
           winds out of his treasuries :                       who smote the first born of
       9 Egypt—the first born both of man and beast.                                       Amidst thee,
           Egypt, he sent his signs and wonders, on Pharao and on all
      10 his servants.             It was he who smote many nations; and slew
      11 kings of mighty power—Seon king of the Amorites, and Og,
      12 the king of Basan, and all the kingdoms of Chanaan ; and gave
           their land for an inheritance—for an inheritance for his people
      13 Israel.             Lord, thy name is forever, and the memorial of thee
      14 to all generations ; for the Lord will judge his people, and take
      15 comfort in his servants.                  The idols of the nations are gold and
      16 silver—the workmanship of men's hands.                                 They have a mouth,
      17 but cannot speak : eyes they have, but they cannot see ; they
           have ears, but they cannot hear ; nor is there any breath in their
      18 mouth.          May they who make them be like them ; and all they
      19 who have trusted in them.                         O house of Israel, bless ye the
     20 Lord : bless the Lord ye of the house of Aaron.                                            house of
           Levi, bless ye the Lord; bless him, ye who fear the Lord.
      21 Blessed be the Lord in Sion—he who inhabiteth Jerusalem.
             2                                                                                  ——:;:
                                                PSALMS.
                                                CXXXVI.
                                               An Alleluia.
             1          GIVE thanks to the Lord for he is good ; for his mercy
             2 endureth forever.         0, give thanks to the God of Gods, for his
             3 mercy endnreth forever.            Give thanks to the Lord of Lords ; for
             4 his mercy endureth forever.            To him who alone hath done great
             5 wonders; for his mercy endureth forever—to him who made
                the heavens with wisdom : for his mercy endureth forever
             6 to him who established the earth on the waters : for his mercy
             7 endureth forever—to him who alone made the great lights
             8 for his mercy endureth forever—the sun to rule the day : for
             9 his mercy endureth forever—the moon and the stars to rule
           1    the night ; for his mercy endureth forever—to him who smote
                Egypt with their first born ; for his mercy endureth for ever
            11 and brought out Israel from among theni ; for his mercy en-
            1   dureth forever : with a strong hand and an outstretched arm
            13 for his mercy endureth forever—to him who divided the Red
            14 sea into parts ; for his mercy endureth forever.                 And led Israel
                through the midst thereof : for his mercy endureth forever
            15 but shook off Pharao and his hosts into the Eed sea; for his
            16 mercy endureth forever:—to him, who led his people through
            17 the desert ; for his mercy endureth forever—to him who smote
            18 great kings ; for his mercy endureth forever : and slew kings
            19 of mighty power : for his mercy endureth forever.—Seon
            20 king of the Amorites ; for his mercy endureth forever ; And
            21 Og the king of Basan; for his mercy endureth forever: and
                 gave their land for an inheritance ; for his mercy endureth for
            22 ever : an inheritance for Israel his servant ; for his mercy en-
            23 dureth forever : because in our affliction the Lord remember-
            24 ed us ; for his mercy endureth forever ; and redeemed us from
            25 our enemies ; for his mercy endureth forever.                  He it is who giv-
            26 eth food to all flesh : for his mercy endureth forever.                        give
                 thanks to the God of heaven : for to everlasting his mercy en-
                 dureth.
                                                 CXXXVIL
                                   For David, a Psalm of Jeremias.
              1       BY the rivers of Babylon there we sat down and wept,
                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                    PSALMS.
          2 when we remembered Sion.                                         Upon the willows in the midst of
          3 it we hung up our harps ; for there they who had captivated us,
               asked of us the words of a song : and they who had led us away,
               asked for a hymn, saying, Sing for us some of the odes of
          4 Sion.             How can we sing the song of the Lord in a strange
           5 country ?                       Jerusalem, if I forget thee, let my right hand he
          6 forgotten.                  Let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, if I
                do not remember thee—if I set not Jerusalem foremost, as the
                chief object of my joy.
           7           Kemember,                      Lord, the children of Edom ; who in the day
           8 of Jerusalem said, Ease ! Ease ! down to its foundations !
                daughter of Babylon the miserable ! Happy he who shall ren-
           9 der thee thy recompense ; for what thou hast done to us ! Hap-
                py be who shall seize and dash thy infants against stones
                                                                   CXXXVIIL
                         A Psalm by David, used by Aggains and Zacharias.
            1         I WILL adore thee,                                    Lord, with my whole heart.                                        And
                 with instrumental musick sing to thee before angels : because
            2 thou hast heard all the words of my mouth.                                                          I will worship be-
                 fore thy holy temple ; and adore thy name for thy mercy and
                 thy truth ; because thou hast magnified above all thy holy
            3 name.               On the day wiien I invoke thee,                                           answer me speedily :
             4 thou canst strengthen me in my soul with thy strength ; let all
                  the kings of this land adore thee,                                                Lord, because they have
             5 heard all the words of thy mouth.                                                 And let them sing in the
             6 ways of the Lord : because the glory of the Lord is great.                                                                       For
                  the Lord is high and looketh down on the things which are
                  low :        and from afar he knoweth the things which are high.
              7 Though I walk in the midst of trouble, thou canst keep me
                  alive.          Against the rage of enemies thou hast stretched forth
              8 thy hand : and thy right hand hath saved me.                                                               Thou,              Lord
                   wilt retribute for me.                                    Lord, thy mercy endureth forever;
                   overlook not the works of thy hands.
                                   PSALMS.
                                  CXXXIX.
                    For the conclusion. A Psalm by David.
         1       LORD, thou hast proved me and known me.           Thou
         2 knowest my sitting down and my rising up.     Thou from afar
         3 understandest my thoughts.   Thou has tracked my path and
           my line : and hast seen distinctly all my ways—that there is
         4 not an evil word on my tongue.    Behold thou,    Lord, know-
         5 est all things—the last and the things of earliest date.Thou
         6 hast formed me and laid thy hand on me.    This knowledge of
           thine is too wonderful for me. It is great beyond my compre-
         7 hension. Whither can I go from thy spirit ? And from thy pre-
         8 sence whither can I flee ? If I ascend up to heaven, thou art
           there. If I go down to the mansion of the dead, there thou art.
         9 If I wing my flight towards the morning ; or dwell at the ex-
        10 tremes of this sea ; even there thy hand will guide me ; and thy
        11 right hand will restrain me.When I said, Darkness will surely
           trample me down : then to my great joy, night was luminous.
        12 For darkness cannot darken from thee ; even night can be
           made light as day : the darkness of that, as the light of this.
        13 Because thou,     Lord, hast possessed my reins—hast sup-
        14 ported me from my mother's womb ; I will adore thee, for
           thou art awfully wonderful.  Thy works are wonderful ; as my
        15 soul well knoweth.  From thee was not concealed this bone of
        16 mine ; which thou in secret didst fashion.When my substance
           was in the lowest parts of the earth ; thine eyes beheld the un-
           wrought part of me.  When on thy book all shall be enrolled ;
        17 they will day by day be fashioned.   When none among these
           were yet in being ; for me these friends of thine,  God, were
           highly prized: their principalities were made very strong.
        18 Were I to number them, they would surpass the sand.    I have
        19 been raised up and am still with thee.    Since thou,    God,
        20 slayest sinners : begone from me ye bloody men.    For in an-
           swer to their reasoning thou wilt say, In vain shall they take
        21 these cities of thine.Have I not,   Lord, hated them who hate
        22 thee ; and been melted for them who are thine enemies ! With
           perfect hatred I have hated them—I have accounted them mine
        23 enemies.  Try me, O God, and know my heart : examine me
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   :
                                                                                                          PSALMS.
                24 and know my ways ; and see if there be in me any trace of ini-
                           quity ; and lead me in an everlasting way.
                                                                                                                  CXL.
                                                       For the conclusion.                                              A Psalm.                              By David.
                    1                 DELIVEE me,                                                     Lord, from a wicked commoner : from
                    2 an unjust man of rank, preserve me ; who hath contrived mis-
                           chief in their heart.                                                   All the day long they prepared battles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   :
                    3 they sharpened their tongue like that of a serpent : the poison
                    4 of asps was under their lips.                                                                        Keep me,                                 Lord, from the hand
                           of a sinner : deliver me from unjust men ; who have formed
                    5 contrivances to supplant my steps.                                                                                          The haughty hid a snare
                           for me—they spread out nets for my feet—close by the way
                    6 they laid for me a stumbling block.                                                                                            I said to the Lord, Thou
                    7 art my God.                                         Hear                       Lord, the voice of my supplication.
                    8 Lord, Lord, the strength of my salvation !                                                                                                            Thou hast cover-
                           ed my head in the day of battle.                                                                                       Deliver me not up to the
                            wicked from my desire.                                                                Against me they have formed de-
                    9 vices : Forsake me not, lest they be exalted.                                                                                                                Let the amount
                           of their compassings—the labour of their lips cover them.
                 10 On them shall fall coals of fire in the land ; and thou wilt over-
                            throw them with miseries ; that they may not rise up again.
                 11 A tattling chief cannot prosper in the land : evils will hunt
                 12 to destruction a man of violence.                                                                                           I know that the Lord will
                           maintain the cause of the afflicted and the right of the needy
                 13 moreover, that the righteous will adore thy name—that the
                            upright shall dwell in thy presence.
                                                                                                                CXLL
                                                                                           A Psalm by David.
                     1                 TO thee,                                   Lord, I have cried, hearken to me—attend
                    2 to the sound of my supplication.                                                                                   When I cry to thee ; let my
                            prayer come before thee as incense—and the lifting up of my
                    3 hands as an evening sacrifice.                                                                                 Set a watch,                                          Lord, on my
                     4 mouth ; and guard the door of my lips.                                                                                                             Let not my heart
                                       VOL. II.                                                                      M m
                                  PSALMS.
         turn aside to wicked deeds—to form excuses for sins with
         men who work iniquity : nor let me associate with their cho-
       5 sen bands.   Let a righteous man correct me with mercy ; and
         he will work conviction in me : but let not the oil of a sinner
         (for this shall still be my prayer) anoint my head at their pleasure.
       6 Their strong men were swallowed up near a rock: let them
       7 hear my words for they were sweet.   As if a lump of earth was
         broken on the ground ; our bones were scattered at the grave's
       8 mouth.   Since mine eyes are to thee,     Lord, Lord—in thee
         I have placed my confidence ; deliver not my soul to destruc-
       9 tion.  Keep me from the snare they have laid for me : and
      10 from the stumbling blocks of the workers of iniquity.      The
         wicked shall fall by their own net, I am in private till I can
         escape.
                                   CXLII.
         On understanding.   By David when he was in the cave.    A
                                   Prayer.
       1     WITH my voice I cried to the Lord—to the Lord I made
       2 supplication with my voice.  Before him I pour out my prayer :
       3 before him I will declare my affliction. When my spirit faint-
         ed thou knewest my paths.    In the way I was going they hid
       4 a snare for me.  I looked to the right ; and observed that none
         was there, who knew me.     Flight was cut off from me ; and
       5 is he not earnestly seeking my life ?     To thee,     Lord, I
         cried and said, Thou art my hope—my portion in the land of
       6 the living. Attend to my supplication ; for I am brought very
         low : deliver me from my persecutors ; for they are stronger
       7 than I.   Bring my soul out of prison, that I may adore thy
         name,    Lord.   Let the righteous wait for me, till thou shalt
         reward me.
                                  CXLIII.
               A Psalm by David, when his son waspursuing him.
       1     O LORD, hearken to my prayer! Listen to my supplica-
       2 tion in thy truth ; answer me in thy saving goodness ; and enter
         not into judgment with thy servant ; for in thy sight no man
         living can be justified.
                                                                            —
                                     PSALMS.
        3      Because the enemy hath earnestly sought my life—hath
           humbled my life to the ground—hath caused me to sit in dark
         4 places, like them who have been long dead ; therefore my spi-
           rit was overwhelmed with grief; my heart within me was trou-
         5 bled and I remembered the days of old.      I meditated on all thy
         6 works—I mused on the works of thy hands.            I spread forth
           my hands to thee ; for thee my soul thirsted like land without
         7 water.  Hear me speedily,     Lord ; my spirit hath failed.   Turn
           not away thy face from me ; nor let me be like them who go
           down to the pit.
         8     Cause me to hear thy kindness in the morning ; for in thee
           I have placed my confidence.        O Lord, let me know which
           way I shall go ; for to thee I have lifted up my soul.
         9     Deliver me,     Lord, from mine enemies ; for to thee I have
        10 fled for refuge.  Teach me to do thy will ; for thou art my God.
           Let thy good spirit lead me in the right way.
        11     For the sake of thy name, thou,          Lord, wilt keep me
           alive—in thy saving goodness thou wilt bring my soul out of
        12 trouble, and in thy mercy cut off mine enemies, and destroy
           all them that afflict my soul ; for I am thy servant.
                                      CXLIV.
                              By David.     On Goliath.
         1     BLESSED be the Lord my God, who teacheth my hands to
         2 war and my fingers to fight.    He is my mercy and my refuge
           my support and my deliverer, my protector in whom I trusted,
           who subdueth the people under me.
         3        Lord, what is man that thou shouldst acknowledge him,
         4 or a son of man that thou shouldst regard him !        Man is like
           vanity, his days glide away like a shadow.
         5       Lord, bow thy heaven and come down : touch the moun-
         6 tains and let them smoke.    Flash lightnings and thou wilt scat-
         7 ter them ; dart thy bolts and thou wilt discomfit them ; stretch
           forth thy hand from on high ; rescue me and deliver me from
           many waters—out of the hand of the children of strangers,
         8 whose mouth hath uttered falsehood, and whose right hand is
           a right hand of deceit
             4
                                                                PSALMS.
             9          O God, to thee I will sing a new song—to thee I will play
           10 on a ten stringed psaltery, to him who giveth salvation to kings,
                 who hath redeemed his servant David from the hurtful sword.
           11 Eescue me and deliver me out of the hand of the children of
                 strangers, whose mouth hath uttered falsehood, and whose right
           12 hand is a right hand of deceit—whose sons are like trees well
                 planted when young; their daughters beauteous, adorned like
           13 shrines ; their store houses full and overflowing ; their flocks
           14 prolific, abounding in their outwalks ; their herds fat.                                                  There is
                 no destruction of enclosures—no breaking out—no screaming
           15 in their folds.                   The people who had such things were hailed
                 happy ; but happy is the people, whose God is the Lord.
                                                                  CXLV.
                                           A Psalm of praise.                      By David,
             1          I WILL extol thee,                            my God, my king : and bless thy
             2 name for ever and ever.                             Day by day I will bless thee, and
             3 praise thy name for ever and ever.                                         The Lord is great and
                 greatly to be praised ; and of his greatness there is no end.
             -1  Let generation after generation praise thy works, and proclaim
             5 thy mighty power : Let them speak of the transcendant glory
             G of thy majesty, and relate thy wonderous works.                                                Let them ex-
                 press the might of thine awful dealings, and rehearse thy great-
             7 ness.          Let them make mention of thine abundant goodness, and
             8 exult with joy in thy saving mercy.                                       The Lord is gracious and
             9 merciful : long suffering and abundant in kindness.                                                    The Lord
                 is kind to them who wait, and his mercies are over all his
           10 works.             Let all thy works,                          Lord, praise thee, and let thy
           11 saints bless thee; let them speak of the glory of thy kingdom,
           12 and talk of thy government : to make known thy government
                 to the sons of men, and the transcendant glory of thy kingdom.
           13 Thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and thy dominion,
            1     throughout all generations.                           The Lord is faithful in his words,
           15 and bountiful in all his works.                                The Lord upholdeth all that are
            16 falling, and raiseth up all who are broken down.                                                   The eyes of
                  all wait upon thee : and thou givest them their food in due sea-
            17 son; thou openest thy hands, and satisfiest the desire of every
                                                                            —
                                    PSALMS.
     18 living thing.    The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and boun-
     19 tiful in all his works. The Lord is near to all who invoke him
     20 to all that call upon him with truth.      He will fulfil the desire of
         them who fear him : he will hear their prayer and save them.
     21 The Lord keepeth all them who love him; but all the wicked
     22 he will utterly destroy.     Let my mouth speak the praise of the
         Lord : and let all flesh bless his holy name, for ever and for
         evermore.
                                     CXLYI.
                    An Alleluia, of Aggaius and Zacharias.
       1     PRAISE the Lord,        my soul : while I live I will praise the
       2 Lord.   I will sing praises to God, while I have a being.       Trust
       3 not in chiefs, nor in sons of men, in whom there is no safety.
       4 His breath goeth out and he shall return to his earth ; on that
       5 day all his projects shall perish.   Happy he whose helper is the
       6 God of Jacob : his hope is in the Lord his God, who made the
       7 heaven and the earth, the sea and all the things in them ; who
         keepeth truth forever, executing judgment for the aggrieved,
       8 giving food to the hungry.       The Lord looseth them who were
         bound.    The Lord causeth the blind to see clearly.       The Lord
         raiseth up them who were broken down.          The Lord loveth the
       9 righteous.   The Lord preserveth the strangers.      He will support
         the orphan and the widow, and destroy the way of the wicked.
      10 The Lord will reign forever—thy God,               Sion, throughout
         all generations.
                                     CXLVII.
                    An Alleluia, of Aggaius oral Zacharias.
       1     PKAISE the Lord, for good is a song of praise ; to our
       2 God let praise be sweetly sung.       The Lord is rebuilding Jeru-
       3 salem ; and he will gather the dispersions of Israel.     He healeth
       4 the broken hearted, and bindeth up their wounds ; he number-
          eth the multitudes of stars, and calleth them all by their names.
       5 Great is our Lord and great his power ; and infinite in his un-
                                                                       —;;;
                                   PSALMS.
         6 derstandiug.  The Lord raiseth up the meek ; and humbleth
         7 sinners to the ground. Sing alternately to the Lord with thanks-
           giving.  In concert with the kithara, sing praises to our God
         8 to him who covereth the heaven with clouds—to him who pro-
           videth rain for the earth—to him who causeth grass to grow on
         9 mountains, and bladed corn for the use of man ; and who giv-
           eth suitable food to cattle, and to the young ravens which call
        10 on him.   In the courage of the horse he will not delight, nor is
        11 he pleased with the agility of the warrior.The Lord delighteth
           in them who fear him, and in all them who trust in his mercy.
                      An Alleluia, of A gains and Zacharias.
                                      g
        12     PEAISE the Lord,      Jerusalem :   Sion, praise thy God
        13 for he hath strengthened the bars of thy gates ; he hath blessed
        14 thy children within thee.   He maketh thy borders peace, and
        15 feedeth thee with the finest wheat;—he is sending his oracle
        16 to this land : his word shall run with speed. When he giveth
           snow like wool—when he scattereth the hoar frost like ashes
        17 when he sendeth down like morsels his chrystal hail ; who can
        18 stand before his cold?  Let him but send forth his word and he
           will melt them—let him but blow his breath and the waters
        19 will flow. He is sending his word to Jacob—his statutes and his
        20 judgments to Israel.  He hath not dealt thus with any nation,
           nor hath he laid open to them his judgments.
                                   CXLV1II.
                    An Alleluia of Aggaius and Zacharias.
         1    PKAISE the Lord, ye of the heavens : praise him, ye in
         2 the highest.  Praise him all ye his angels : praise him all ye
         3 his hosts. Sun and moon !   Praise him : praise him all ye stars
         4 and light.  Praise him ye heavens of heavens : and thou water
         5 under the heavens ! let them praise the name of the Lord
           for he spake and they were produced : he commanded and
         6 they were created.  He established them forever and ever: he
                                          PSALMS.
       7 made a decree and it shall not pass away.                 Praise the Lord ye
       8 of the earth ! dragons and all deeps !                 Fire, hail, snow, ice,
       9 tempestuous wind, which execute his commands !                            Moun-
      10 tains, and all hills ! fruit trees and all cedars ! wild beasts
      11 and all cattle ! creeping things and winged fowls !                   Kings of
          the earth, and all peoples ! chiefs and all judges of the earth !
      12 youths and virgins ! elders with them of younger years ! let
      13 them praise the name of the Lord ; for his name alone is
          exalted.     To him belongeth thanksgiving, on earth and in
      14 heaven.       When he shall exalt the horn of his people, let there
          be a song of praise among all his saints—among the children
          of Israel—a people who draw near to him.
                                           CXLIX.
                                         An Alleluia.
       1       SING to the Lord a new song.                Praise is his due in the
       2 congregation of saints.          Let Israel rejoice in his maker—and
       3 the children of Sion exult in their king.                Let them praise his
          name in choirs—on the tympanum and psaltery sing praises
       4 to him : for the Lord taketh pleasure in his people ; and with
       5 salvation he will exalt the meek.               Let the saints triumph in
       6 glory ; and exult with joy on their beds.               Let the high praises
          of God be in their mouth ; and in their hands two edged
       7 swords ; to execute vengeance on the nations—rebukes among
       8 peoples.      To bind their kings with fetters ; and their nobles
       9 with chains of iron : to execute on them the judgments writ-
          ten.    Such is the honour which all his saints have.
                                              CL.
                                        An Alleluia.
        1      PKAISE God in his holies; praise him in the firmament
        2 of his power.       Praise him for his mighty acts : praise him ac-
       .3 cording to his abundant majesty : praise him with the sound-
       4 ing trumpet : praise him with the psaltery and kithara : praise
          him with the tympanum and chorus : praise him with stringed
                                        PSALMS.
          5 instruments and organs; praise him with soft sounding cym-
          6 bals : praise him with the cymbals of triumph : let every breath
            praise the Lord.
              N. B.   There is in the Septuagint another Psalm, with this
                     title:—This Psalm on David was written by himself
                     in prose, when hefought in single combat with Goliath.
              I was little among my brethren, and the youngest of my fa-
          ther's family.   I fed my father's flocks.    My hands had made an
          organ ; and my fingers had tuned a psaltery.        But who will tell
          my Lord.    My Lord himself heareth.      He sent his messenger and
          took me from my father's flocks and anointed me with anointing
          oil. My brothers were comely and great ; but the Lord did not
          delight in them.    I went out to meet the Philistine, and he cur-
          sed me by his idols.    But I drew his own sword and cut off his
         head, and took away reproach from the children of Israel.
      Ch. I.           THE PROVERBS OF SOLOMON.
      I.            The Proverbs of David's son Sol'0711011, who reigned
              over Israel, to give a knowledge of ivisdom and instruction—
              the perception of the words of prudence—the interpretation
              of sentences—a discernment of true justice ;         and to direct
              judgment, that he might give sagacity to the innocent; and
              to  the youth knowledge and discretion : for by attending to
              them a wise man will become wiser; and a man of under-
              standing will possess a ride of government and will under-
              stand a proverb and dark speech and the sayings of the wise
              andparables.
       7      The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom.           And all
          who practise this have good understanding.         And piety towards
          God is the beginning of discernment : but the wicked despise
          wisdom and instruction.
       8      My son, hear the instruction of thy father and reject not
       9 the maxims of thy mother: for thou wilt receive a graceful
          crown for thy head ; and a chain of gold for thy neck.
      10      My son, let not wicked men lead thee astray.          Consent not
      11 when they advise thee, saying, Come with us ; partake of blood ;
          and let us hide in the earth an innocent man without cause,
      12 and swallow him up alive, as the grave, and take away from
          earth the remembrance of him.         Let us seize his precious sub-
          stance and fill our houses with spoils.       Cast in thy lot among
          us, and let us all have a common purse.        Let one scrip serve us.
      15 Go not thou in the way with them ; but turn thy foot from their
          paths.   For nets are not spread for birds unjustly.     For they who
          are accomplices to murder, treasure up evils for themselves.
          And doleful is the destruction of wicked men.            Such are the
          ways of all who commit iniquitous deeds.          For by wickedness
          they destroy their own soul.
      20      Wisdom uttereth her song at the gates and in the streets
          speaketh boldly; and on the tops of walls she maketh procla-
          mation ; and at the gates of mighty men taketh a seat and at the
          gates of a city with confidence saith,
      22      " While the innocent adhere to justice they shall not be put
          to shame : but as for fools who delight in mischief, having
          become wicked they hated knowledge and are become liable
          to censures.   Behold I will pour forth to you the dictate of my
          spirit : and teach you this word of mine—seeing I have called
              vol. 11.                    N n
                                                                                                                                                         ;
                       II.                                            PKOVEBBS.
              Ch.
                     and you have not answered: and though I continued my
                     speech, you did not attend : but set at naught my counsels and
              26 disregarded my reproofs : therefore I will laugh at your calam-
              27 ity            and mock when your destruction cometh.                                                       Yes, when tu-
                             ;
                     mult shall suddenly come upon you ; and destruction like a
                      whirlwind shall be at hand—even when tribulation and siege
                      approach you ; or when destruction is advancing upon you.
               28 For when you call upon me I will not listen to you.                                                                 The wick-
               29 ed may seek me, but they shall not find me.                                                             For they hated
               30 wisdom and did not chuse the word of the Lord: nor would
               31 they attend to my counsels, but contemned my reproofs: Let
                      them eat, therefore, the fruits of their own way ; and be filled
               32 with their own iniquity.                                      For, because they wronged infants
                      they shall be slain: and a rigorous inquest shall destroy the
               33 wicked.                 But he who hearkeneth to me shall dwell with hope
                      and rest secure from all evil."
               II.            My son, if thou wilt receive the dictate which I enjoin
                      and hide it with thee, thine ear will hearken to wisdom ; and
                      thou wilt apply thy heart to understanding, and transmit it for
                 3 instruction to thy son.                                  For if thou wilt call upon wisdom :
                      and utter thy voice for understanding—if thou wilt seek for it
                 5 as silver ; and search for it as for treasures ; then thou shalt
                      understand the fear of the Lord ; and find the knowledge of
                  6 God.             For the Lord giveth wisdom; and from his presence is
                      knowledge and understanding : and he treasureth up salva-
                  7 tion for the upright.                           He will protect their going, that they may
                  8 keep the paths of rectitude.                                         And he will guard the way of
                  9 them who reverence him.                                      Then thou shalt understand judg-
                10 ment and justice ; and direct all thy wheels right.                                                                 For when
                       wisdom entereth into thine understanding : and knowledge ap-
                11 peareth pleasant to thy soul : good counsel will keep thee, and
                12 holy prudence will guard thee : that she may deliver thee from
                       an evil way and from a man who speaketh perversely.
                13            Alas for them who leave straight paths to walk in the ways
                14 of darkness ; who are delighted with evils and have joy in evil
                15 perversion ; whose ways are crooked, and whose paths turn
                16 aside to lead thee far from the straight road and estrange thee
                       from a just determination.
                17             My son, let not evil counsel, who hath forsaken the disci-
                                                                                                               ;
       Ch. III.                                  PKOVERBS.
            pline of youth and hath forgotten the divine covenant, take
       18 hold of thee.             For she hath placed her house near death ; and
            her wheels with the earth born near the mansion of the
      19 dead.         None who walk by her direction can ever return ; nor
      20 ever recover the right paths.                        For they are not taken hold of
            by years of life.             If they indeed had walked in good ways:
      21 they would have found the paths of justice smooth.                                         Because
            the upright shall inhabit the land ; and the holy shall be left in
      22 it ; the ways of the wicked shall be destroyed from the land
            and the transgressors shall be driven out of it.
      III.         My son, forget not my laws; but let thy heart keep my
            commandments.               For they will add to thee length of days and
            years of life and peace.
        2        Let not acts of kindness and faithfulness forsake thee : but
        4 bind them about thy neck and thou shalt find favour.                                      Be pro-
            vident in regard to things good in the sight of the Lord and
        5 of men.          Trust in God with thy whole heart ; and be not elated
        6 for thine own wisdom.                  Shew it in all thy ways, that it may make
        7 thy paths straight.               Be not wise in thine own conceit ; but fear
        8 God and depart from all evil : then shall thy body have health
        9 and thy bones a cure.                      Honour the Lord with some of thy
            righteous labours : and set apart for him some of thy fruits of
      10 righteousness : that thy barns may be plenteously filled with
            corn ; and that thy vats may overflow with wine.
      11         My son, slight not the correction of the Lord ; nor faint
      12 when reproved by him : for whom the Lord loveth he reprov-
            eth : and chastiseth every son whom he receiveth.
      13         Happy the man, who hath found wisdom : and the mortal
      14 who hath seen prudence : for it is better to traffick for her,
      15 than for treasures of gold and silver.                              She is more precious
           than costly stones : and nothing evil can be compared to her.
            She is easily known by all who approach her ; but no price is
      16 equal to her in value.                 For length of days and years of life are
           in her right hand ; and in her left, riches and glory.                               Out of her
            mouth proceedeth righteousness : and on her tongue she car-
      17 rieth law and mercy.                     Her ways are ways of pleasantness and
      18 all her paths are peace.                    She is a tree of life to all who take
            hold of her; and safe for them who rely on her, as on the Lord.
      19 By wisdom God founded the earth; and by understanding he
                               PKOVEEBS.
       Ch. IV.
       20 furnished the heavens.By knowledge the deeps were broken
          up and the clouds distilled dew.
       21    My son, be not wanting in retention : but keep my counsel,
       22 namely, the sentiment : that thy soul may live and that grace
          may be around thy neck : and it will be health to thy flesh and
       23 a cure for thy bones ; that thou mayst proceed on in all thy
          ways in peace and security ; and that thy foot may not stumble.
       24 For when thou liest down, thou shalt be free from fear : and
       25 when thou sleej)est, thou shalt sleep sweetly ; and shalt not fear
          the bursting in of terror; nor the sudden assaults of wicked
       26 men.  For the Lord will be over all thy ways, and will support
          thy foot that thou mayst not be shaken.
       27    Delay not to do good to the needy, when it is in the power
      28 of thy hand to help.Do not say, Go away and come again : to-
         morrow I will give ; when thou hast it in thy power to do
          good : for thou knowest not what to-morrow will bring forth.
      29     Devise not evils against thy friend ; who sojourneth with
         thee and confideth in thee.
      30    Be not at enmity with a man without cause ; lest he do thee
         some mischief.
      31    Acquire not the reproaches of bad men, nor be fond of
      32 their ways. For every transgressor is impure in the sight of
         the Lord ; and among the righteous he taketh not a seat.
      33    The curse of God is in the houses of the wicked : but the
      34 folds of the righteous are blessed.The Lord resisteth the proud ;
      35 but he granteth favour to the humble.The wise shall inherit
         glory ; but the wicked have extolled dishonour.
      IV.    Hear,   children, the instructions of a father ; and attend
       2 to know the meaning : for I am giving you a good gift ; forsake
       3 not my law : for I was a son obedient to a father ; and beloved
       4 in the sight of a mother : and they said when they taught me,
            " Let our words sink deep in thy heart. Keep our com-
       5 mandments ; do not forget—overlook not the dictate of my
       6 mouth : forsake it not, and it will defend thee : love it and it
       8 will preserve thee : secure it and it will exalt thee : honour it
       9 that it may embrace thee : that it may be to thy head a crown
         of graces and cover thee with a crown of pleasure."
      10    Hear my son and receive my words; that, when the years
         of thy life shall be multiplied, thou mayst have many ways of
                                                                                                       ;;
                                               PROVERBS.
       Ch. V.
       11a livelihood : for I am teaching thee ways of wisdom ; and
       12 confirming thee in right paths.                   For when thou goest, thy steps
            will not be straitened : and when thou runnest thou shalt not
       13 be tired.         Take fast hold of mine instruction, let it not go : but
       14 keep it for thyself during thy life.                   Go not in the ways of wick-
       15 ed men ; nor be fond of the ways of transgressors.                                 In what
            place soever they encamp, go not thither : but turn away from
       16 them and keep at a distance : for they cannot sleep.                                 Unless
            they do evil ; their sleep is taken from them and they cannot
       17 lie down to rest.             For they eat the bread of wickedness; and
            drink plentifully of the wine of violence.                     But the paths of the
            just shine like light ; shining more and more until it is perfect
       19 day.       But the ways of the wicked being dark ; they know not
            at what they stumble.
       20        Attend, my son, to my speech, and incline thine ear to my
       21 words.        That thy fountains may not fail thee, keep them in thy
       22 heart ; for they are life to them who find them and health to all
       23 flesh.      Guard thy heart with all diligence ; for out of these are
       2-1 the issues of life.           Put away from thee a froward mouth, and
       25 put perverse lips far from thee.                     Let thine eyes look straight
       26 forward and thine eyelids wink justly.                          Make straight paths
       27 with thy feet and order all thy ways right.                            Turn not to the
            right, nor the left ; but turn away thy foot from an evil way
            for God knoweth the ways on the right, but those on the left
           are crooked.         But he will make thy paths straight and conduct
            thy steps in peace.
      V.        My son, attend to my wisdom, and incline thine ear to my
        2 words, that thou mayst keep a good understanding.                                 Now the
           sense of my lips giveth thee this injunction—listen not to an
        3 abandoned woman ; for honey droppeth from the lips of a har-
        4 lot, which for a while pleaseth thy palate ; but in the end thou
           wilt find it bitterer than gall, and sharper than a two edged
        5 sword.       For the feet of folly lead them, who indulge themselves
        6 with her, down with death to the mansion of the dead.                                    Her
           steps indeed are not established, for she walketh not in the
        7 ways of life.        Her paths are slippery and not easily known.                      Now
        8 therefore, my son, hearken to me and slight not my words.                                Re-
           move thy way far from her, go not near the doors of her house
        9 That thou mayst not give thy life to others, and thy substance
                                   PEOVERBS.
       Oh. VI.
       10 to the cruel : that strangers may not be filled with thy wealth,
       11 and thy labours go into the houses of strangers, and thou at
           last be grieved.  When the flesh of thy body is consumed, then
       12 thou wilt say, " How have I hated instruction, and my heart
       13 despised reproof !  I hearkened not to the voice of him who in-
       14 structed me and taught me ; nor have I inclined mine ear.        I
           have been almost in all evil, in the midst of the assembly and
           congregation."
       15     Drink water from thine own vessels, and from the wells of
       16 thine own fountain.    Let not the waters from thy fountain over-
       17 flow for thee; but let thy waters run in thine own streets. Let them
       18 be for thyself only, and let no stranger partake with thee. Let thy
           fountain of water be appropriate to thyself; and rejoice with
       19 the wife of thy youth.    Let thy loving hind and graceful fawn
           converse with thee ; and let her be accounted peculiarly thine,
           and be with thee on all occasions.   For ravished with her love
       20 thou wilt become a numerous family.         Be not devoted to a
           strange woman, nor embraced in the arms of one not thine own.
       21 For the ways of a husband are before the eyes of God, and he
        22 examineth narrowly all his paths.    Iniquities hunt a man ; but
       23 every one is caught by the cords of his own sins.      Such a one
           dieth with the uninstructed, but from his plentiful means of liv-
           ing he was cast out, and perished by reason of folly.
       VI.      My son, if thou become surety for thy friend, thou wilt
         2 deliver up thy hand to an enemy.     For a man's own lips are a
           powerful snare, and he is caught by the words of his own mouth.
         3 Do, my son, what I enjoin thee, and save thyself; for thou art
           come into the hands of bad men on thy friend's account.        Be
           not remiss, but importune thy friend for whom thou art surety.
         4 Give no sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eyelids, that
           thou mayst be saved like a roe from a toil, and like a bird from
           a snare.
         6     Go to the ant, thou sluggard; and having seen its ways
         7 follow the example and be wiser than it.   For having no culti-
         8 vated field, no driver, nor master, it provideth its food in sum-
           mer, and layeth up a plentiful supply in harvest.   Or go to the
           bee and learn what a worker she is : and how seriously she per-
           formeth her work, to the labours of which both kings and sub-
           jects apply themselves as far as health permits ; and to all it is
                                                                                                                                                                      :
          Ch. VI.                                                        PROVEEBS.
                 agreeable and honourable.                                          And though her strength be small,
            9 having honoured wisdom she is diligently employed.                                                                                 How long
                  wilt thou sleep,                               sluggard, and when wilt thou rouse from
          10 sleep ?                  Thou art sleeping a little—but resting a little—but tak-
                  ing a short nap—but folding thy hands a little while on thy
          11 breast !                  But is not poverty coming upon thee like an unwel-
                 come traveller ?                           And want like a speedy courier ?                                                  Whereas if
                 thou be diligent; thy harvest will come like a fountain, and want
                  like a bad courier will run away.
          12              A man void of understanding, and a transgressor, walketh
          13 in ways which are not good.                                                 But he winketh with his eye and
                 maketh a sign with his foot; and teacheth, by pointing his
         14 fingers ; his depraved heart contriveth mischief.                                                                          Such a one is
         15 continually raising tumults in a city.                                                               For this cause his de-
                 struction                cometh suddenly—wounds and incurable bruises.
         16 Because he delighteth in all those things which God hateth
         17 therefore he is destroyed for the depravity of his soul.                                                                                 His eye
                 is that of a scorner; his tongue is false; his hands are employ-
         18 ed in shedding innocent blood—his heart contriveth wicked
         19 purposes, and his feet are swift to do evil : as a false witness
                 he spreadeth lies, and soweth discord among brethren.
         20              My son, keep the laws of thy father, and reject not the max-
         21 ims of thy mother.                                      Bind them continually on thy mind : and
         22 tie them as a chain around thy neck.                                                             When thou walkest, take
                 this along and let it be with thee : and when thou sleepest, let
                 it guard thee ; that when thou awakest, it may talk with thee.
         23 For the command of a law is a lamp and light ; and reproof and
         24 instruction is the way of life, to keep thee from a married wo-
         25 man, and from the flattering tongue of a strange woman.                                                                                            Let
                 not a lust for beauty overcome thee : be not captivated by thine
         26 eyes, nor ensnared by her eyelids.                                                        For the price of a harlot is
                 scarce that of a single loaf; but an adulteress hunteth for the
         27 precious lives of men.                                         Can any one put fire in his bosom and
         28 not burn his clothes ?                                      Or can one walk on coals of fire and not
         29 burn his feet ?                            So he who goeth in, to a married woman, can-
                 not escape punishment—no, nor any one who toucheth her.
         30 It exciteth no wonder, if one be caught stealing ; for a hungry
         31 man stealeth to satisfy his soul ; but if he be caught, he is to
                 pay seven fold ; and by giving all that he hath, he will deliver
                                                                                                                                                                              ::
                            VII.                                                 PEOVERBS.
                  Ch.
                  32 himself.                    But he, who through want of understanding, commit-
                  33 teth adultery, provideth destruction for his soul.                                                                           He suffereth
                          pangs and dishonour; and his reproach can never be wiped
                  34 away.                  For the rage of her husband being full of jealousy, will
                  35 not spare in the day of vengeance ; nor will he abate his enmi-
                          ty for any ransom ; nor be appeased by many gifts.
                  VII.                 My son keep my words and lay up my commandments
                          with thee.
                     2            My son, honor the Lord and thou shall be strong; but be-
                          sides him, fear no other.                                       Keep my commandments, that thou
                     3 mayst live ; and my words as the apple of thine eye.                                                                            Bind them
                          about thy fingers, and write them on the table of thy heart.
                     4 Implore Wisdom to be thy sister, and make Understanding
                     5 thine acquaintance : that she may keep thee from a strange and
                          wicked woman, in case she, with alluring words should attack
                     6 thee.              For through a lattice she looketh out of her house into
                     7 the streets; and if among the simple youths she chanceth to
                     8 see a young man, void of understanding, walking near a corner
                     9 in the passages to her house, and talking in the twilight, when
                  10 the evening is still and duskish :—then this woman, who mak-
                          eth the hearts of young men flutter, meeteth him, in the attire
                  11 of a harlot.                       Indeed she is ever on the wing and insatiable, and
                  12 her feet abide not at home.                                               For sometimes she roveth abroad
                          and sometimes lieth in wait in the streets, at every corner.
                  13 Ha ! she hath caught him and kissed him, and with an unblush-
                          ing countenance, said to him :
                  14              " I have a peace offering ; to-day I am paying my vows
                  15 for this reason I came out to meet thee : earnestly longing to
                  16 see thee.                     I have found thee.                               With cords I have stretched my
                  17 bed, and decked it with tapestry from Egypt.                                                                           I have perfum-
                  18 ed my bed with saffron, and my house with cinnamon : come,
                          and let us take our fill of love till the morning :—come and let
                  19 us solace ourselves with love.                                                For my husband is not at home,
                  20 he is gone a long journey ; he took in his hand a roll of silver,
                          and will return to his house after many days."
                   21              So with much fawning discourse she led him astray ; and
                   22 with the flattery of her lips inveigled him.                                                                        And he is gone
                           after her, attracted by her ; as an ox is led to slaughter, or as
                           a dog to be chained : or like a deer pierced through the liver
                                                                            —
     Ch. VIII.                     PKOVEKBS.
     23 with a dart.    And lie hasteth like a bird to a snare ; not know-
         ing that he is running the risk of his life.
     24     Now therefore ray son hearken to me ; and attend to the
     25 words of rny mouth.      Let not thy heart turn aside to her ways :
     26 for she hath wounded and brought down many ; and innumera-
     28 ble are they whom she hath slain.        Her house is the highway
     VIII.    to Hades, leading down to the chambers of death.          As for
         thee thou art to proclaim wisdom ; that understanding may
      2 attend thee.    For she is on the lofty summits ; and hath taken
      3 her stand in the middle of highways.         For at the gates of the
         mighty she hath taken a seat, and at the entrance thereof chant-
         eth her song.
      4     "To you,        men, I call, and utter my voice to the sons
      5 of men.     Ye who are innocent learn discretion : and ye who
      6 are uninstructed give attention. Hearken to me, for I will speak
         solemn things ; and with my lips disclose things which are
      7 right.   For my mouth shall speak truth ; lying lips are indeed
      8 abominable in my sight.       All the words of my mouth are with
         righteousness ; they have nothing crooked—nothing deceitful
      9 in them.     They are all plain to men of understanding: and
     10 right to them who find knowledge.            Eeceive instruction in
         preference to silver, and knowledge rather than fine gold.
     11 For wisdom is better than precious stones : and no costly
     12 thing is equal to it in value.     I wisdom have inhabited counsel
         and knowledge ; and I have made an appeal to understand-
     13 ing.   The fear of the Lord hateth injustice and insolence and
         haughtiness and the ways of the wicked : and I have hated the
     14 crooked ways of bad men.        To me belong counsel and safety.
     15 Prudence is mine—mine is fortitude.         By me kings reign and
     16 princes decree justice.     By me potentates are exalted ; and by
     17 me sovereigns rule the earth.         Them who love me, I love :
     18 and they who seek me shall find me.         With me are riches and
     19 glory; even great possessions and righteousness.             My fruit
         is better than gold and precious stones: and my productions
     20 are better than choice silver.     I walk in the ways of righteous-
     21 ness; and am conversant in the paths of judgment: that I
         may distribute wealth to them who love me; and fill their
         treasuries with good things.
             VOL. II.                   O O
                                                                             ——;:
        Ck. IX.                       PROVERBS.
               Having told you things which happen daily ; I will now
        22 remember to reckon up things of old.         The Lord created me,
        23 the beginning of his ways for his works.        Before this age he
        24 founded me ; in the beginning ; before he made the earth and
            before he made the deeps : before the fountains of water issued
        25 forth—before the mountains were established ; and before all
        26 the hills, he bringeth me forth. The Lord made fields and unin-
        27 inhabited wilds ; and the habitable heights of the earth. When he
           furnished the heaven, I was with him ; and when he set apart his
        28 own throne on the winds : and when he strengthened the clouds
        29 above : and when he secured the fountains of the earth below
        30 And when he made the foundations of the earth strong : I was
           harmonizing with him.      I was the one in whom he delighted
        31 and I was daily gladdened by his presence on all occasions
           when he finished the world and was pleased therewith ; and when
       32 he was pleased with the sons of men.         Now therefore, my son
           hearken to me : happy is the man who will hearken to me
       34 and the man who will keep my ways ; watching daily at my
       35 gates, waiting at the posts of my doors.       For my ways are the
       37 ways of life ; and volition is obtained from the Lord.      But they
           who sin against me act wickedly against their own souls ; and
           they who hate me love death."
       IX.      Wisdom hath built herself a house, and fixed underneath
         2 it seven pillars.  She hath slain her victims.     She hath mixed
        3 her wine for the cup and furnished her table.         She hath sent
           out her servants, and with a loud proclamation hath given an
           invitation to her entertainment, saying,
        4      " Whosoever is simple, let him come to me."        And to them
        5 who want understanding she saith, "Come, eat of my bread
        6 and drink the wine which I have mixed for you.         Forsake folly,
           that you may reign forever : and seek prudence and build up
        7 understanding with knowledge."        He who instructeth the wick-
           ed shall receive for himself dishonour ; and he who reproveth
        8 the ungodly will blemish himself.         Rebuke not the wicked,
           lest they hate thee ; rebuke a wise man and he will love thee.
        9 Give a wise man a hint and he will be wiser— an intimation to
       10 a righteous man and he will proceed to take it.      The fear of the
           Lord is the beginning of wisdom ; and knowledge is the coun-
       11 sel of the holy.    For to know the law is a characteristick of a
                                                                                                                 ;
               X.                                  PROVEEBS.
        Ch.
             good understanding ; for by this means thou shalt live long, and
             years of life will be added to thee.
        12         My son, if thou art wise for thyself, thou wilt be wise also
             for thy neighbours.                 But if thou become wicked, thou alone
             shalt draw up evils.               He who leaneth upon lies, feedeth on the
             wind, and he shall pursue flying birds ; for he hath left the walks
             of his own vineyard, and wandered out of the paths of his own
             field, and traverseth a desert without water, and a land destined
        13 to thirst ; and with his hands gathereth sterility.                               Awomanwho
             is foolish and bold needeth a curb ; she hath no sense of shame.
        14 She sat at the doors of her house—on a seat open to view in
        15 the streets ; calling to passengers who were going right on their
        16 ways, " Let him who is the simplest of you turn aside to me
        17 and them who want prudence I exhort saying, Taste sweetly
       18 bread in secret and water sweeter for being stolen.                                     He indeed
             did not know that with her the earth born perish—that he is
             lighting upon the perch of death.                        But fly thou away speedily ;
             tarry not in that place, nor fix thine eyes upon her ; for in this
             manner thou shouldst pass by strange water.                                     Abstain from
             strange water, and drink not of a strange fountain ; that thou
             mayst live long, and that years of life may be added to thee.
        X.         A wise son maketh a father glad ; but a foolish son is a
             grief to the mother.
         2         Treasures cannot profit the wicked ; but righteousness will
             deliver from death.
         3         The Lord will not kill with hunger a righteous soul; but
             he will overthrow the life of the wicked.
         4         Want humbleth a man ; but the hands of the diligent en-
             rich.
                   A well instructed son will be wise, and shall have the sim-
             ple for a servant.
          5        A prudent son is safe from heat ; but a transgressing son is
             blasted in harvest.
          6        The blessing of the Lord is on the head of the righteous ;
             but untimely grief shall stop the mouth of the wicked.
         7        The just are remembered with praises ; but the name of the
             wicked is extinguished.
          8        The wise in heart will receive commandments; but a pre-
             varicating babbler shall be subverted.
               1                                                                                                               ;
            Ch. X.                                         PEOVEKBS.
               9        He who walketh uprightly walketh securely ; but he who
                  perverteth his ways shall be known.
             10         He who winketh deceitfully with his eyes, collecteth sor-
                   rows for men ; but he who reproveth freely maketh peace.
             1          There is a fountain of life in the hand of the righteous ; but
                   destruction will stop the mouth of the wicked.
             12         Hatred stirreth up contention ; but friendship covereth all
                  them who are not contentious.
             13         He who from his lips uttereth wisdom, smiteth an impru-
                  dent man with a rod.
            14          Wise men will lay up knowledge; but the mouth of the
                  rash is near destruction.
            15          The wealth of the rich is a strong city : but penury is the
                  destruction of the wicked.
            16          The works of the righteous produce life ; but the hands
                  of the wicked produce sins.
            17          Instruction keepeth the just ways of life ; but unexamined
                  instruction leadeth astray.
            18          Honest lips hide hatred; but they who utter reproaches
                  are the greatest fools.
            19          In speaking much thou canst not avoid sin ; but if thou art
                  sparing of thy lips, thou wilt be wise.
            20          The tongue of the righteous is tried silver ; but the heart of
                  the wicked will not stand the test.
            21          The lips of the righteous are skilled in things lofty ; but
                  those devoid of understanding die of want.
            22          The blessing of the Lord is on the head of the righteous ; it
                  maketh rich, and to it no sorrow of heart shall be joined.
             23         A fool doth mischief in sport ; but for man wisdom bring-
                   eth forth prudence.
             24         A wicked man is whirled about by destruction; but the
                   desire of the righteous is acceptable.
             25          In a passing tempest a wicked man vanisheth ; but the righ-
                   teous turn aside and are safe forever.
             26          As vinegar is hurtful to the teeth ; and smoke to the eyes
                   so is transgression to them who commit it.
             27          The fear of the Lord prolongeth days ; but the years of the
                   wicked shall be shortened.
        XL                 PROVERBS.
    Cb.
    28    Joy niaketh a long abode with the righteous ; but the hope of
       the wicked shall perish.
    29    The fear of the Lord is the holy man's bulwark ; but de-
       struction is for the workers of iniquity.
    30    The righteous shall never transfer ; but the wicked shall
       not inhabit the land.
    31    The mouth of the righteous distilleth wisdom ; but the
       tongue of the wicked shall be destroyed.
    32    The lips of righteous men distil graces; but the mouth of
       the wicked is perverse.
    XL     A deceitful balance is an abomination to the Lord : but
       a just weight is his delight.
     2    Where pride entereth, there dishonour [entereth] also.
          But the mouth of the lowly speaketh wisdom.
     3    A righteous man dying left sorrow behind him; but the
       destruction of the wicked cometh suddenly and giveth joy.
     5    Righteousness maketh spotless ways straight : but wicked-
       ness falleth by iniquity.
     6    The righteousness of upright men delivereth them : but
       transgressors are caught by their destruction.
     7    When a righteous man dieth, hope is not lost : but the
       boast of the wicked perisheth.
     8    A righteous man escapeth a snare : and in his stead the
       wicked is delivered up.
     9    In the mouth of the wicked is a snare for citizens : but
       the knowledge of the righteous conduceth to prosperity.
    11    By the good acts of the just a city flourished : but by the
       mouth of the wicked it was overthrown.
    12    A man void of wisdom derideth fellow citizens : but a pru-
       dent man enjoyeth quiet.
    13    A double tongued man revealeth cabinet counsels : but
       one of a faithful spirit concealeth matters.
    14    They, who have no government, fall like leaves : but in
       much counsel there is safety.
    15    A wicked man doth hurt, when he associateth with the
       just : but he hateth the sound of safety.
    16     A virtuous woman raiseth honour for her husband : but a
       woman who hateth righteousness is a throne of disgrace.
          The slothful though rich, become indigent : but the dili-
        gent are supported with wealth.
                                                                                                    !                          ;
                                                            PROVERBS.
            Oh. XII.
            17          A merciful man doth good to his own soul : but the mer-
                  ciless destroyeth his own body.
            18          A wicked man doth works of injustice : but the seed of the
                  righteous is a reward of truth.
            19          A righteous son is born to live; but the pursuit of the
                  wicked tendeth to death.
            20          Crooked ways are an abomination to the Lord : but all who
                  are blameless in their ways are his delight.
            21          He who wickedly joineth hand to hand shall not go unpun-
                  ished :      but he who soweth righteousness shall receive a just
                  reward.
            22          As a jewel in the snout of a swine ; so is beauty in a wo-
                  man void of discretion.
            23          The desire of the righteous is altogether good ; but the
                  hope of the wicked shall perish.
            24          There are some who scattering their substance make it
                  more : and some who gather and make it less.
             25         A soul is blessed which is altogether sincere : but a pas-
                  sionate man is not respected.
             2(3        May he who withholdeth corn leave it to the nations !                                            But
                   blessing be on the head of him who distributeth
             27          The contriver of good things seeketh favour: but him,
                   who seeketh mischief, mischief shall overtake.
             28          He who trusteth in riches shall fall ; but he who helpeth
                   the righteous shall nourish.
             29          He who hath no cover for his own house shall inherit the
                   wind ; and a fool shall be a servant to the prudent.
             30          From the fruit of righteousness springeth up the tree of
                   life : but the lives of transgressors are prematurely destroyed.
             31          If the righteous man scarcely escapeth : where shall the
                   ungodly and sinner appear ?
             XII.            He who loveth instruction loveth knowledge : but he
                   who hateth reproofs is a fool.
               2         He who hath found favour with the Lord groweth better
                   but the transgressor shall be put to silence.
               3         A man cannot prosper by wickedness : but the roots of the
                   righteous shall not be moved.
               4         A virtuous woman is a crown to her husband : but a mis-
                   chievous woman, like a worm in wood, ruineth her husband.
                                                                                                                                      :
       Ch. XII.                                            PROVERBS.
         5          The thoughts of the righteous are judgments : but the
             wicked manage deceits.
         6          The words of the wicked are deceitful : but the mouth of
             the upright shall deliver them.
         7          When the wicked is overthrown, he vanisheth : but the
              houses of the righteous shall remain.
         8          The mouth of the wise is praised by man : but the stupid
              heart is despised.
         9          Better is the man, who unhonoured serveth himself: than
              he who honoureth himself and wanteth bread.
       10           A righteous man regardeth the lives of his beasts : but the
              mercies of the wicked are cruel.
        11          He who tilleth his own ground shall be satisfied with bread :
              but they who pursue vanities are void of understanding.
                    He who taketh pleasure in taverns shall leave disgrace in
              his own fortresses.
        12           The desires of the wicked are evil : but the roots of the
              righteous are in secure places.
        13           By the transgression of his lips a sinner falleth into snares
              but out of them a righteous man maketh his escape.
                    He whose looks are mild will gain compassion : but he who
              contendeth in the gates will afflict souls.
        14           From the fruits of his mouth the soul of man shall be satis-
              fied with good things ; and the recompence of his lips shall be
               given him.
        15           The ways of fools are right in their own eyes : but a wise
               man hearkeneth to advice.
        16           A fool presently sheweth his wrath : but a prudent man
               concealeth his dishonour.
        17           A righteous man declareth the truth as it appeareth to him :
               but a false witness is deceitful.
        18           They who wound with their speeches are swords : but the
               tongues of the wise are healing.
        19            True lips establish testimony : but a hasty witness hath an
               unrighteous tongue.
        20           Deceit is in the heart of him, who contriveth evils : but
               the counsellors of peace shall have joy.
        21           Nothing unjust can please a righteous man : but the wick-
               ed can fill themselves with mischief.
              XIII.                    PROVERBS.
         Ch.
         22     Lying lips are an abomination to the Lord : but he who
             dealeth faithfully is acceptable to him.
         23     A prudent man is a throne of knowledge : but the heart of
            fools will encounter curses.
         24     The hand of the valiant can easily conquer : but the de-
             ceitful shall be for a prey.
         25     Awful news trouble the heart of a righteous man : but good
            news make him glad.
         26     A righteous judge will be a friend to himself: but evils
            shall pursue sinners : and the way of the wicked shall deceive
            them.
         27     A deceitful man shall not enjoy what he hath caught ; but
            as for a pure man, his acquisition is precious.
        28      In the ways of righteousness there is life ; but the ways of
            the revengeful lead to death.
        XIII.       A wise son is obedient to his father ; but a disobedient
            son is in the way to destruction.
          2     A good man eateth of the fruits of righteousness : but the
            souls of transgressors shall perish untimely.
          3     He who guardeth his mouth preserveth his life ; but he who
            is rash with his mouth, shall bring on himself terror.
          4     Every sluggard is employed in wishing : but the hands of
            the diligent, in procuring.
          5     A righteous man hateth a false word; but the wicked is
            shamed and shall not have confidence.
          7     Some pretend to be rich, having nothing ; and some feign
            themselves poor, in great wealth.
          8     The ransom of a man's life is his wealth ; but a poor man
            is not subject to threats.
          9     The righteous have light continually ; but the light of the
            wicked is extinguished.
                Deceitful souls are led astray by sins ; but the righteous
            exercise pity and compassion.
        10      A wicked man doth mischief with haughtiness; but wise
            men are their own judges.
         11     Wealth acquired by injustice, diminisheth ; but he who
            gathereth for himself with piety, shall be satisfied.     A righteous
            man sheweth mercy and lendeth.
        12      Better is he who heartily beginneth to help, than he who
      Ch. XIV.                       PEOVERBS.
          proniiseth and giveth expectation ; for good desire is a tree of
          life.
      13      He who despiseth business shall be despised by it ; but he
          who feareth a commandment is safe.
              To a deceitful son nothing can be good : but the actions of a
          wise servant are prosperous, and his way will be prospered.
      14      The law of the wise is a fountain of life ; but the fool shall
          die by a snare.
      15      A good understanding giveth favour : and to know the
          law is a proof of good understanding ; but the ways of impos-
          tors end in destruction.
      16      Every prudent man acteth with knowledge ; but the fool
          hath laid open his wickedness.
      17      A daring king will involve himself in evils ; but a wise am-
          bassador will deliver him.
      18      Instruction removeth poverty and disgrace ; and he who re-
          gardeth reproofs shall be honoured.
      19      The desires of the pious sweeten life : but the works of the
          wicked are far from knowledge.
      20      By walking with the wise thou wilt be wise ; but he who
          walketh with fools will be known.
      21      Evils shall pursue sinners, but good will overtake the
          righteous.
      22      A good man shall leave an inheritance to his children ; but
          the wealth of the wicked is treasured up for the righteous.
      23      The righteous shall spend many years in wealth ; but the un-
          righteous shall perish in a short time.
      24      He who spareth the rod hateth his son; but he who loveth
          him correcteth diligently.
      25      A righteous man eateth and satisfieth his soul ; but the souls
          of the wicked are insatiate.
      XIV.        Wise women have built houses ; but the foolish hath
          pulled them down with her hands.
       2      He who walketh uprightly, feareth the Lord ; but he who
          is perverse in his ways, shall be dishonoured.
       3      From the mouth of fools there is a rod of pride ; but the lips
          of the wise preserve them.
       4      Where there are no cattle the stalls are clean ; but where
          there is much provender, the ox's strength is manifest.
              VOL. II.                    P p
                                                                                                                   ;
          Ch. XIV.                                  PROVERBS.
            5        Afaithful witness doth not lie ; but a false witness kindleth
                lies.
            6        Thou mayest seek wisdom among the wicked, but shalt not
                find it ; but knowledge is easily found among the prudent.
            7        All things are contrary to a foolish man : but wise lips are
                the arms of knowledge.
            8        The wisdom of the prudent will give them a knowledge of
                their ways ; but the folly of fools is in error.
            9        The houses of transgressors need purifying; but the
                houses of the righteous are acceptable.
           10        The heart of a man who hath sensibility—the soul of him
                who hath a feeling for pain, when he is made glad, mingleth not
                with pride.
           11         The houses of the wicked shall vanish ; but the tents of the
                upright shall stand.
           12         There is a way which seemeth right to a man ; but the end
                of it is at the bottom of Hades.
           13         Grief mixeth not with pleasures; but extreme joy tendeth
                to sorrow.
           14         A bold hearted man will be satisfied with his own ways
                but a good man, with his intentions.
           15         A man without guile, believeth every thing : but a prudent
                man cometh for a change of mind.
           16         A wise man, when terrified, declineth from evil : but the
                fool, confident in himself, mixeth with transgressors.
           17         A passionate man acteth without counsel ; but a pru-
                 dent man beareth many things.
           18         Fools partake of wickedness ; but the prudent will lay
                 hold of knowledge.
           19         Let the bad fall before the good ; and the wicked attend at
                 the gates of the righteous !
           20         Friends will hate poor friends; but the friends of the rich
                 are many.
           21         He who despiseth the poor, sinneth : but he who compas-
                 sionateth the poor is blessed.
           22         They who are led astray devise mischief; but the good de-
                 vise mercy and truth.
                      The contrivers of mischief know neither mercy nor truth;
                 but acts of kindness and truth are with them, who contrive good.
                                                                                                                           ;;
        Ch. XV.                                      PKOVERBS.
        23          With all who are careful there is abundance; but he who
              is delicate and taketh no trouble shall be in want.
        24          A prudent man is a crown to the wise ; but the conversa-
              tion of fools is evil.
        25          A true witness will deliver a soul from evils; but a deceit-
              ful witness kindleth lies.
        26          In the fear of the Lord a man hath hope of strength
              and to his children he leaveth a support.
        27          The commandment of the Lord is a fountain of life ; and
              it causeth to decline from the snare of death.
        28          In the multitude of a nation is the glory of a king • but in
              the failure of a people is the destruction of a prince.
        29          A man slow to wrath, is of great understanding ; but a pas-
              sionate man is egregiously foolish.
        30          A meek minded man is a physician of the heart ; but a
              heart of sensibility is a corroder of the bones.
        31          He who oppresseth the poor, provoketh his maker; but he
              who honoureth him, compassionateth the distressed.
        32          A wicked man shall be driven away by his wickedness
              but in his sanctity the righteous is secure.
        33          In the good heart of a man there is wisdom ; but in the
              heart of fools it is not discernable.
        34          Righteousness exalteth a nation, but sins diminish tribes.
        35          A wise minister is acceptable to a king : but by his own
              good conduct he removeth disgrace.
        XV.             Wrath destroyeth even the prudent ; now a soft answer
              turneth away wrath ; but a harsh word stirreth up anger.
          2         The tongue of the wise knoweth good things ; but the mouth
              of fools poureth out evils.
          3         The eyes of the Lord are in every place, they behold both
              the evil and the good.
          4          A healing tongue is a tree of life ; and he who keepeth it
               shall be filled with the spirit.
           5        A fool despiseth the instruction of a father: but he who
               keepeth commands is more prudent.
                     Where righteousness aboundeth there is much power : but
               the wicked being utterly rooted out of the land, shall perish.
           6         In the houses of the righteous there is much power ; but
               the fruits of the wicked shall perish.
                                                                                                                   ;
            Oh. XV.                                     PKOVEKBS.
             7         The lips of the wise are devoted to knowledge; but the
                 hearts of fools are not safe.
             8        The sacrifices of the wicked are an abomination to the
                 Lord ; but the prayers of the upright are acceptable to him.
             9        The ways of the wicked are an abomination to the Lord
                 but he loveth them who follow righteousness.
            10        The correction of the innocent is remarked by them who
                 pass by ; but they who hate reproofs die dishonourably.
           11         The mansion of the dead, and destruction, are open to the
                 view of the Lord ; how much more then the hearts of men !
           12         An uninstructed man will not love them who reprove him,
                 nor will he associate with the wise.
           13          When the heart is glad the countenance is cheerful ; but
                 when in sorrow, it is sad.
           14         An upright heart seeketh knowledge ; but the mouth of
                the uninstructed will taste evils.
           15         The eyes of the wicked are continually looking for evils ; but
                the good are continually at rest.
           16         Better is a small portion with the fear of the Lord, than
                great treasures without that fear.
           17         Better is a dinner on herbs, with friendship and favour, than
                a feast on young bulls, with enmity.
           18         A wrathful man prepareth battles ; but he who is slow to
                 anger appeaseth the rising quarrel.
                      A man slow to anger will extinguish law suits; but the
                wicked rather promote them.
           19         The ways of the slothful are strewed with thorns ; but those
                of the diligent are well beaten.
           20         A wise son maketh a glad father; but a foolish son mock-
                eth his mother.
           21         The paths of the foolish are destitute of understanding ; but
                a prudent man walketh uprightly.
           22         They who do not honour councils, substitute thoughts : but
           23 by the understanding of counsellors, counsel will endure.                                          A
                 wicked man will not hearken to it, nor can he say any thing
                in season, or for the publick good.
           24         The determinations of the wise are ways of life, that he
                may turn from the mansion of the dead and be saved.
                                                                                                                                 :  :
       Ch. XVI.                                         PROVERBS.
       25           The Lord destroyeth the houses of the haughty : but the
             border of the widow he hath established.
       26           An evil thought is an abomination to the Lord : but the
             speeches of the chaste are grave.
       27           He who receiveth bribes destroyeth himself: but he who
             hateth the receiving of bribes is safe.
                    By acts of kindness and faithfulness sins are purged away
             and by the fear of the Lord every one will decline from evil.
       28           The hearts of the righteous study faithfulness : but the
             mouth of the wicked poureth out evil things.
                    The ways of the righteous are acceptable to the Lord :
             and by them enemies are made friends.
       29           God is far removed from the wicked : but he hearkeneth to
             the prayers of the righteous.
                    Better is a small portion with righteousness; than much
             produce with injustice.
                    Let the heart of man devise righteous things, that his
             steps may be directed by God.
       30           The eye which beholdeth good things rejoiceth the heart
       31           And a good reputation maketh the bones fat.
       32           He who rejecteth instruction hateth himself: but he who
             regardeth reproofs loveth his soul.
       33           The fear of the Lord is instruction and wisdom : and the
              beginning of glory will be answerable thereto.
       XVI.               All the works of the humble are manifest in the sight
              of God ; but the wicked shall perish in an evil day.
         4          Every lofted minded man is impure in the sight of God :
              and he who hath joined hand to hand unjustly shall not go
              unpunished.
                    The beginning of a good way is to do things just and ac-
              ceptable in the sight of God, rather than to offer sacrifices.
                    He who seeketh the Lord shall find knowledge with right-
              eousness.           And they who seek him early shall find peace.
          5         All the works of the Lord are with righteousness : but the
              wicked is kept for an evil day.
        10          Divine sentence is in the mouth of a king : therefore his
              mouth should not err in judgment.
        11           Justice is that which turneth the scales with the Lord.                                                  And
              his works are of just weight.
                                                                                                                                            :
                     XVI.                                        PROVERBS.
              Ch.
              12           An evil doer is an abomination to a king : for the throne
                    of government is established by righteousness.
              10           Righteous lips are acceptable to a king ; and he loveth right
                    words.
              14           The wrath of a king is a messenger of death : but a wise
                    man can pacify it.
              15           The son of a king is in the light of life : and they who
                    are acceptable to him are as an evening cloud.
              16           The productions of wisdom are better than gold : and the
                    productions of prudence are better than silver.
              17           The paths of life turn aside from evils : and the ways of right-
                     eousness are length of life.
                           He who receiveth instruction shall enjoy good : and he who
                     regardeth reproofs shall be wise.
                           He who watcheth his own ways preserveth his soul : and
                     he who loveth his life will be sparing of his mouth.
               18          Pride goeth before destruction: and a haughty spirit be-
                     fore a fall.
               19           A man of a gentle spirit with humility is better than he who
                     divideth spoils with scorners.
               20           A man intelligent in business is an inventer of good things :
                     but most happy is he whose trust is in God.
               21           The wise and prudent are called crafty ; and they who are
                     sweet in discourse will be more listened to.
               22           Understanding is a fountain of life to them who possess it
                     but the instruction of fools is evil.
               23           The heart of a wise man will consider the words of his
                      mouth : and on his lips he will carry knowledge.
               24           Good words are a honey comb: and the sweetness thereof
                      is health to the soul.
                25           There are ways which seem right to a man : but the latter
                      ends of them look to the bottom of Hades.
                26           A man by labour laboureth for himself; and wardeth off
                      his own destruction.
                27           He who is utterly perverse carrieth destruction in his mouth.
                       A man void of understanding diggeth up evils for himself;
                       and treasureth up fire with his lips.
                28           Afroward man spreadeth mischief.                                    He will light up a lamp
                       of deceit for evils ; and he separateth them who were friends.
                                                                                                                                                   :;
      Ch. XVII.                                                PKOVERBS.
      29             The man who is a transgressor enticeth friends ; and lead-
      30 eth them in ways which are not good.                                                      But he who fixeth his
             eyes and deviseth froward things ; and with his month en-
             forceth all his evil purposes ; is a very furnace of wickedness.
      31             Old age is a crown of glory, when found in the ways of
             righteousness.
      32             Aman who is slow to wrath is better than the mighty ; and
             he who subdueth anger is better than he who taketh a city,
      33             All things come upon the wicked into their bosoms : but
              from the Lord all things which are just.
       XVII.                  Better is a morsel with pleasure in peace ; than a house
              full of goods and ill gotten dainties, with contention.
         2           A wise servant will rule over foolish masters ; and di-
              vide portions among brothers.
         3           As silver and gold are tried in a furnace ; so are chosen
              hearts, by the Lord.
         4            A wicked man kearkeneth to the tongue of transgressors
              but a righteous man payeth no attention to lying lips.
          5           He who derideth a man in distress provoketh his maker
              and he who rejoiceth at another's ruin shall not go unpunish-
               ed : but he who sheweth compassion shall find mercy.
          6           Children's children are the crown of old men : and the
               boast of children, is their fathers.
                      Every ornament of wealth belongeth to the faithful ; but to
               the unfaithful, not a farthing.
          7           Faithful lips will not harmonize with a fool ; nor lying
               lips with a righteous man.
          8           Instruction is a precious reward to them who use it : and
               whithersoever it turneth it will prosper.
           9          He who hideth transgressions seeketh friendship :                                                                       but
               he who hateth to conceal, setteth friends and relations at var-
               riance.
        10             A threat affecteth the heart of the prudent : but a fool,
                though scourged, is not made sensible.
         11            Every wicked man stirreth up contention : but the Lord
                will send him a cruel messenger.
         12            Trouble may befal a prudent man : but the foolish will de-
                vise mischief.
         13            Whosoever returneth evil for good ; from his house evils
                shall not depart.
                                                                                             —                        ;
              Ch. XVIII.                               PKOVEKBS.
              14        A righteous government giveth force to words : but sedi-
                   tion and quarrelling are the forerunners of want.
              15        He who acquitteth the wicked and condenineth the just, is
                   unclean and abominable in the sight of God.
              16        Whyshould a fool have wealth ? For the stupid cannot pur-
                   chase wisdom.
                        He who buildeth his house high seeketh destruction : and
                   he who is backward to learn shall fall into evils.
              17        For every occasion have a friend ; but in distress let bro-
                   thers be assistant : for they are born for this purpose.
             18         A man void of understanding clappeth his hands and ap-
                   plaudeth himself on becoming surety for his friends,
             19         He who is fond of sinning delighteth in quarrels : but he
             20 who is stubborn doth not meet with good.
                        A man of a changeable tongue will fall into evils : but the
                   heart of a fool is sorrow to him who hath it.
             21         A father hath no joy in an unteachable son : but a prudent
                   son is the joy of his mother.
             22         A cheerful heart promoteth health ; but the bones of a
                   heart-wounded man are dried up.
             23         When one unrighteously receiveth gifts in his bosom ; his
                   ways will not be straight.                   But a wicked man perverteth the
                   ways of justice.
             24         The countenance of a wise man is intelligent ; but the fool's
                   eyes are on the ends of the earth.
             25         A foolish son is a vexation to a father; and sorrow to her
                     who bore him.
             26         To fine a righteous man is not good : nor is it consistent
                   with piety to plot against righteous rulers.
             27         He who forbeareth to utter a harsh word is prudent : and
                   he who is slow to anger is a man of understanding.
              28        Wisdom will be imputed to a fool, who inquireth after wis-
                   dom: and he who imposeth silence on himself will be esteem-
                   ed wise.
              XVIII.            He who desireth to part with friends seeketh ex-
                   cuses ; but he will always be liable to reproach.
               2        He who is void of understanding hath no use for wisdom
                   for he is rather led by folly.
    Ch. XVIII                    PKOVERBS.
     3     When a wicked man cometh to a depth of evils he sheweth
        contempt ; but ignominy and reproach come upon him.
     4     A speech in a man's heart is deep water ; but a stream is-
        sueth forth and a flowing spring.
     5     To respect the person of a wicked man is not good ; nor is
        it consistent with piety to pervert justice in judgment.
     6     The lips of a fool lead him into trouble ; and his mouth
        when bold provoketh death.
     7     The mouth of a fool is his destruction, and his lips are a
     8 snare for his soul.
           Fear depresseth the slothful ; and the souls of the effeminate
        shall suffer want.
     9     He who doth not use his endeavours to cure himself is bro-
        ther to him who destroyeth himself.
    10     The name of the Lord is of majestic power ; and the righte-
        ous having recourse to it shall be exalted.
    11     A rich man's wealth is a strong city, and the glory of it
       casteth a great shadow.
    12     Before destruction a man's heart is haughty, and before
       honour it is humble.
    13     He who answereth a matter before he heareth it, exposeth
       his folly and incurreth contempt.
    14     A wise servant appeaseth a man's anger ; but a mean spi-
       rited man who can bear ?
    15     The heart of a prudent man getteth knowledge; and the
       ears of the wise seek understanding.
    16     A man's gift maketh room for him, and procureth him a
       seat among the mighty.
    17     Ajust man is his own accuser in his first speech ; but when
       he is accused his adversary is refuted.
    18     The silent lot putteth an end to contention, and determineth
       among the mighty.
    19     A brother assisted by a brother is like a fortified and lofty
       city, and is strong as a well founded palace.
    20     With the fruits of his mouth a man filleth his belly, and
       with the fruits of his lips he shall be satisfied.
    21     Death and life are in the power of the tongue ; and they who
       have the command of it shall eat the fruits thereof.
           VOL. II.                   Q q
                                                                                                                                ;
              Oh. XIX.                                      PROVERBS.
              22           He who hath found a good wife hath found favour, and
                    hath received joy from God.
                          Hewho putteth away a good wife, putteth away good things
                    but he who retaineth an adulteress is foolish and wicked.
              XIX.             The folly of a man maketh his ways destructive ; but in
                    his heart he blameth God.
                4         Wealth maketh many friends; but a poor man is for-
                    saken by the only friend he hath.
                5         A false witness shall not go unpunished ; and he who accus-
                    eth unjustly shall not escape.
                6         Many court the favour of kings; but every one who is
                    wicked is a disgrace to a man in power.
                7        Every one who hateth a brother in distress shall be far
                    from friendship.
                         A good understanding will approach them who know it,
                    and a prudent man will find it.
                         He who doth much evil perfecteth wickedness ; and he who
                   useth irritating words shall not be safe.
               8         He who procureth wisdom loveth himself; and he who
                   keepeth it shall find good things.
               9         Let not a false witness go unpunished ; and let him who
                   kindleth mischief perish by it.
             10          It is not seemly for a fool to enjoy delicacies ; nor for a ser-
                   vant to begin to domineer with haughtiness.
             11          A merciful man is slow to wrath ; and his boast is over
                   transgressors.
             12          The threat of a king is like the roaring of a lion; but his
                   favour is like dew on the grass.
             13          Afoolish son is a shame to a father.
                         Yows for the hire of a harlot are not pure.
             14          Fathers bequeath houses and wealth to children ; but the
                   Lord accommodateth a wife to a husband.
             15          Fear restraineth the effeminate; but the soul of the sloth-
                   ful shall suffer want.
             16          He who keepeth a command preserveth his soul; but he
                   who despiseth his own ways shall perish.
             17          He who is kind to the poor lendeth to God ; and accord-
                   ing to his gift he will repay him.
     Ch. XX.                  PROVERBS.
     18     Chasten thy son, for thus he will be hopeful ; but be not in
        thy soul transported to haughtiness.
     19     Let a malicious man be fined high ; but if he take away life,
        let him forfeit his own.
     20     Hear my son, the instruction of thy father that thou mayst
        be wise in thy latter days.
     21     There are many thoughts in a man's heart ; but the coun-
        sel of the Lord shall endure forever.
     22     Beneficence is a crop for a man : and a poor just man is
        better than a rich liar.
     23     The fear of the Lord conduceth to a man's life : but he
        who is fearless will lodge in places where knowledge doth not
        watch.
     24     He who hideth his hands in his bosom unjustly ; should
        not bring them out for his mouth.
     25     When a criminal is scourged, a simpleton becometh more
        wary : but if thou rebukest a wise man, he will call to mind
        knowledge.
     26     He who bringeth dishonour on a father and causeth his mo-
        ther to flee ; shall be exposed to shame and shall be reproached.
     27     A son who ceaseth to keep the instruction of a father ; will
        meditate on evil sayings.
     28     He who is surety for a foolish son, shall rail at the statute ;
        but the mouth of the wicked shall swallow decisions.
     29     Rods are prepared for the profligate: and punishments in
        like manner for fools.
     XX.      Wine is intemperate, and drunkenness scornful.     And
        with these every fool is entangled.
      2     The threat of a king is like the rage of a lion ; and he who
        provoketh him sinneth against his own life.
      3     It is an honour to a man to abstain from railing ; but with
        such things every fool is entangled.
      4     Though a sluggard is reproached he is not ashamed : and
        the same is the case with him who borroweth corn in harvest.
      5     Counsel in the heart of a man is deep water ; but a man of
        understanding will draw it up.
      6     A man is a great thing : and a merciful man a precious
        thing : but it is hard to find a faithful man.
      7     He who conducteth himself spotless in justice shall leave
        behind him his children happy.
                                                                                                                                           :.
              Oh. XXL                                            PROVERBS.
                8          When a righteous king sitteth on a throne, nothing that is
                    evil can stand his eyes.
                9          Who can boast that he hath a clean heart ?                                          Or who can say
                    with confidence that he is pure from sin ?
              20           Whosoever curseth father or mother; let his lamp be ex-
                    tinguished and his eye balls involved in darkness.
              21          A portion got at first with too much haste will not at the
                    last be blessed.
              22          Do not say, I will take vengeance on an enemy ; but wait
                    for the Lord that he may help thee.
              10           Diverse weights and diverse measures are impure in the
                    sight of the Lord.                    Yes, both they and he who useth them.
              11          A youth when in company with the godly, will be restrain-
                    ed in his devices and his way will be straight.
              12          The ear heareth and the eye seeth ; and both are the work
                    of the Lord.
              ] 3         Love not contradiction that thou mayst not be destroyed
                    open thine eyes and be filled with bread.
             24           A diverse weight is an abomination to the Lord : and a de-
                    ceitful balance is not good in his sight.
                          The steps for a man are plainly set forth by the Lord : how
                    then should a mortal consider his ways !
             25           The hasty dedication of his property is a snare to a man
                    for after the vow a change of mind happeneth.
             26           A wise king is a winnower of the wicked; and he will
                    bring a wheel over them.
             27           The spirit of man is a light of the Lord, who searcheth
                    the inward recesses of the body.
             28           Beneficence and truth are a guard to a king : and they will
                    encompass his throne with justice.
             29           Wisdom is an ornament to young men : and grey hairs are
                    the glory of the old.
              30          Blood shot eyes and bruises light upon bad men : and there
                    are wounds for the inner recesses of the body.
              XXI.              The heart of a king is in the hand of God ; like a canal
                    of water, he turneth it whithersoever he pleaseth.
                2         Every man appeareth righteous in his own eyes : but the
                    Lord directeth hearts.
         XXI                    PEOVERBS.
     Ch.
      3     To do justice and to adhere to truth are more acceptable to
        God than the blood of victims.
      4     A high minded man is contentious and stubborn : but sin is
        the lamp of the wicked.
      6     He who getteth treasures by a lying tongue, pursueth vanity
        to the snares of death.
      7     Destruction shall lodge with the wicked ; because they re-
        fuse to do justice.
      8     To the perverse God sendeth crooked ways : for his works
        are pure and right.
      9     It is better to dwell in a corner in the open air ; than in
        apartments plaistered with injustice ; and in a house which is not
        clean.
     10     The soul of the wicked will not be pitied by any man.
     11     When a profligate is punished the innocent become more
        cautious ; and the intelligent wise man will gain knowledge.
     12     A just man discerneth the hearts of the wicked ; and des-
        piseth the wicked for their wickedness.
     13     He who stoppeth his ears that he may not hear the distress-
        ed shall himself cry, and there shall be none to answer.
     14     A gift given secretly pacifieth resentments : but he who is
        sparing of gifts exciteth strong wrath.
     15     It is the joy of the righteous to execute judgment : but in
        the view of the wicked a holy man is unclean.
     16    A man who wandereth from the path of justice, shall go to
        rest among the congregation of giants.
     17    Aneedyman loveth pleasure.      He wisheth to have wine and
        oil for his riches : and a transgressor wisheth to be acquitted as
        a righteous man.
     19    It is better to dwell in the wilderness than with a quarrel-
        some, clamorous and passionate wife.
    20     A desirable treasure will rest in the mouth of the wise : but
        men who are foolish will swallow it.
     21     The way ofjustice and mercy will lead to life and glory.
     22    A wise man hath scaled strong cities and demolished forti-
        fications in which the wicked trusted.
    23     He who guardeth his mouth and tongue keepeth his soul
        from trouble.
                                                                                                                     ;
                    XXII.                              PROVERBS.
             Ch.
             24         He who is bold, selfwilled and boastful is called loimos [a
                  pest ;] and he who harboureth mischief is called a transgressor.
             25         Wishing killeth the slothful ; for his hands do not chuse to
                  labour.
             26        All the day long a wicked man indulgeth wicked desires
                  but the righteous unsparingly exerciseth pity and compassion.
             27         The sacrifices of the wicked are an abomination to the
                  Lord ; because they offer them unrighteously.
             28        A false witness shall perish ; but a man who is a witness
                  will speak guardedly.
             29        A wicked man impudently hardeneth his face : but the up-
                  right will himself consider his ways.
             30        There is no wisdom, there is no fortitude, no counsel in the
                  wicked.
            31         A horse is provided for the day of battle : but help cometh
                  from the Lord.
            XXII.             A good name is to be chosen in preference to great
                  wealth ; and good favour, in preference to gold and silver.
              2        The rich and poor have met each other ; and the Lord hath
                  made them both.
              3        A prudent man seeing the wicked severely punished in-
                  structeth himself: but the foolish passed heedlessly by and
                  were punished.
              4        The offspring of wisdom are the fear of the Lord and
                  riches and glory and life.
              5        Thorns and snares are in crooked paths : but he who
                  watcheth his soul shall avoid them.
              7        The rich rule over the poor ; though servants lend to their
                  own masters.
              8        He who soweth iniquity shall reap evils ; and compleat the
                  punishment of his deeds.
                       God blesseth a cheerful giver; and will supply the defi-
                  ciency of his works.
              9        He who compassionateth the poor shall be fed ; for he gave
                  of his own bread to the poor.
                       He who giveth gifts secureth victory and honour.                                    He in-
                  deed taketh away the soul of the receivers.
             10         Expel from council an overbearing man ; and contention
          XXII.                    PROVERBS.
     Ch.
         will go out with him : for if he sitteth in council he dishonour-
         eth all.
     11     The Lord loveth holy hearts ; and all the unspotted are ac-
         ceptable to him.
            A king feedeth with his lips ; but the eyes of the Lord dili-
         gently watch the sentiment : and a transgressing word setteth
         it at naught.
     13     A slothful man maketh excuse and saith, There is a lion
         in the highways and murderers in the streets.
     14     The mouth of a transgressor is a deep ditch ; and he who is
         hated of the Lord shall fall into it.
            There are bad ways before a man and he loveth not to avoid
         them : but he ought to avoid a crooked and bad way.
     15     Folly is bound up in the heart of a child : but a rod and in-
         struction will drive it from him.
     16     Some plunder the poor to increase their wealth and give to
         the rich to lessen it.
     17     Incline thine ear to the words of the wise ; and hear my dis-
         course and apply thy heart ; that thou mayst know that they are
     18 good.    If thou indeed wilt lay them up in thy heart ; they will
     19 give thee delight and be on thy lips. In order that thy hope may
         be upon the Lord ; and that he may make known to thee thy
     20 way.    Write thou them for thyself three times over ; for counsel
     21 and knowledge, on the table of thy heart.         For this purpose 1
         teach thee sound doctrine and knowledge good to be listened
         to : that thou mayst answer them who propound to thee
         words of truth.
     22     Oppress not the needy because he is poor : nor treat with
         disrespect at the gates one who is weak.
     23     For the Lord will judge his cause ; and thou shouldst pre-
         serve thy life safe and secure.
     24     Have no fellowship with a man addicted to wrath ; nor lodge
         with a friend who is passionate : lest thou learn his ways and
         lay a snare for thine own life.
     25     Do not out of respect for a person become surety.           For if
     26 thou hast not wherewithal to pay, thy bed will be taken from
         under thee.
     27      Remove not ancient boundaries which thy fathers have set.
                                                                                                                              ;
            Ch. XXIII.                                    PEOYERBS.
            28          A man clear in his perceptions and quick in the despatch
                  of business should stand before kings and not wait on slothful
                  men.
            XXIII.               When thou sittest down to eat at the table of a ruler
                  observe diligently what are set before thee : and put to thy
              2 hand, knowing that thou must provide the like.                                            But if thou
                  hast an appetite not easily satisfied ; desire not his dainties ; for
                  they give false life.
              3         If thou art poor, enter not into competition with one who
              4 is rich : but be restrained by thine own prudence.                                          If thou fix
                  thy view toward him, he is out of sight : for he is provided
                  with wings as of an eagle ; and directeth his course to the
                 house of one who is before him.
             5         Eat not with an envious man, nor desire his meats : for he
              6 eateth and drinketh as one swallowing a hair.                                        Neither invite
                 him to thy house, nor eat thy morsel with him : for it will
                 cause him to vomit and he will blame thy kind invitations.
              7        Make no addresses to a man void of understanding: lest
             8 he peradventure mock thy judicious discourse.                                             Remove not
                 ancient land marks, nor encroach upon the possession of the
             9 fatherless.            For the Lord who is their redeemer is strong ; and
                 will plead their cause with thee.
            10         Apply thy heart to instruction ; and prepare thine ears for
                 the words of knowledge.
           11          Refrain not from correcting a child : for if thou beat him
           12 with a rod, thou mayst prevent his death.                                       For thou wilt beat
                 him with a rod and deliver his soul from death.
            13         My son, if thy heart be wise, thou wilt gladden my heart.
           14 And thy lips, if they be right, will hold long conversation with
                 mine.
           15          Let not thy heart envy sinners : but be thou in the fear of
                 the Lord all the day long.
           18          If thou indeed keep these instructions : they will be a pro-
                 geny to thee and thy hope shall not perish.
           19          Hear, my son and be wise and direct the thoughts of thy
                 heart aright.
           20          Be not a wine bibber, nor devoted to clubs : and to the pur-
           21 chasing of flesh meat.                      For every one addicted to revelling and
                                 PKOVEKBS.
     Ch. XXIV.
        stews shall come to beggary : and every one given to sleep
        shall be clothed with rags and tatters.
    22      Hearken, rny son, to the father who begot thee : and de-
        spise not thy mother because she is old.
    24      A righteous father nourisheth thee well ; and his soul re-
        joiceth in a wise son.
     25     Let thy father and thy mother have joy in thee : and let her
        who bare thee rejoice.
     26     My son, give me thy heart; and let thine eyes observe
        my ways.
     27     For a strange house is a hogshead full of holes : and a strange
     28 well is narrow.   For that will quickly perish ; and every trans-
        gressor shall be destroyed.
     29     Who hath woes ? Who hath trouble? Who hath law suits ?
        Who hath vexations and squabbles ?        Who hath wounds with-
     30 out cause ?    Whose are the eyes suffused with blood ?         Are
        they not theirs who tarry long at wine—who frequent the places
        where there are revels ?
            Be not drunk with wine ; but converse with righteous men :
     31 and converse in the publick walks.       For if thou givest thine
        eyes to cups and goblets ; thou wilt go about afterwards na-
     32 ked as a pestle : and be, at last, like one swoln by the bite of
     33 a serpent; or as one stung by a basilisk.        When thine eyes
        behold a strange woman ; then will thy mouth speak perversely.
     34 And thou wilt lie as in the midst of the sea : and like a pilot
     35 in a mighty storm.     And thou wilt say, They have beaten me
        and I felt no pain ; they insulted me and I was not sensible of it.
        When will it be day, that I may go and seek with whom I can
        have a meeting.
     XXIV.       My son, envy not bad men, nor desire to be with
      2 them : for their hearts study falsehood ; and their lips utter
        mischief.
      3     By wisdom a house is built; and by understanding it is
        established.
      4     By knowledge chambers are filled with all precious and
         pleasant riches.
      5     Better is a wise man than one who is strong : and the man
         who hath understanding, than he who hath a large cultivated
         field.
            VOL. II.                   R r
                    XXIV.                              PKOVEKBS.
             Oh.
              6        By government war is conducted ! and help is the attend-
                  ant of a heart instructed by counsel.
              7        Wisdom and good understanding are in the gates of the
                  wise :     the wise turn not away from the commandment of
                  the Lord : but they consult in counsels.
              9        Death meeteth the uninstructed and a fool dieth by sins.
                                                          willed, arrogant and boastful there is
             10        In a man who is self
                  impurity : in an evil day and a day of adversity, he will be
                  stained deeper and deeper, until he utterly faint.
             11        Deliver them who are to be led away to death ; and inter-
             12 cede for them who are to be slain, make no delay.                                         If thou
                  should say, I do not know this man: know that the Lord
                  knoweth the hearts of all : and that he, who gave breath to all,
                  knoweth all things : and will render to every one according to
                  his works.
             13         My son, eat honey (for a honey comb is good) that thy pa-
             14 late may be sweetened.                    In like manner let thy soul taste wis-
                  dom for if thou find it, thy end will be good and hope will
                          ;
                  not forsake thee.
             15         Lead not the wicked to the pasture of the righteous ; nor
             16 be led astray for a bellyfull.                      For a righteous man may fall
                  seven times and rise again ; but in calamities the wicked shall
                  be without strength.
             17         If thine enemy fall rejoice not over him ; nor be elated at
                  his stumbling : for the Lord will see and it will displease him,
                   and he will turn away his wrath.
             18         Kejoice not over evil doers nor envy sinners.                           For the poste-
                   rity of an evil one cannot continue ; and the lamp of the wicked
                   shall be extinguished.
             19         My son, fear God and the king and be not disobedient to
                   either of them.           For they can suddenly punish the wicked ; and
                   their punishments who can know ?
             21         A son who keepeth the word shall be far from destruc-
                   tion ; for he hath received it to effect.
             22         Let no falsehood be uttered from the mouth of a king, and
                   from his mouth let no falsehood proceed.
              23         The tongue of a king is a sword and not flesh; whoever
                   is delivered up to it shall be destroyed.                           For if his wrath be
                   sharpened, it consumeth men with thongs, and devoureth the
                                                              —
    Ch. XXX. XXIV.          PROVERBS.
       bones of men ; or like a flame, burnetii them up, so that they
       cannot be devoured by young eagles.
    XXX.     My son, be awed by these words of mine, receive them
       and reform. Thus saith the man to them who trust in God
       but I stop.For I am the most foolish of all men.And I have
     2 not the understanding of man in me.God hath taught me wis-
       dom : and I have gained a knowledge of holy things.
     3    Who hath ascended up to heaven and come down ?
          Who hath collected the winds in his bosom?
          Who hath infolded the water in a mantle ?
          Who hath a dominion over all the ends of the earth ?
          What is his name ? or what the name of his sons ?
          Since all the words of God are tried, and he is a shield to
       them who revere him; add not to his words lest he reprove
       thee and thou be found a liar.
          Two things I beg of thee—deprive me not of favour before
       I die ; remove far from me vanity and lying.Give me neither
       riches nor poverty, but order for me things necessary and
       convenient ; that when I am filled I may not become false and
       say, Who seeth me ?  Or being in want, steal and swear by the
       name of God.
          Deliver not up a servant into the hands of a master; lest
       he curse thee and thou be removed out of sight.
          A wicked progeny curse their father and bless not their
       mother.
          A wicked progeny judge themselves righteous, but have
       not purged their ways.
          A wicked progeny have lofty eyes and uplifted eyebrows.
          A wicked progeny have teeth like swords and grinders
       like cleavers, so as to consume and devour the poor from the
       earth, and the needy from among men.
    XXIY. 23 But this I say to you who are wise to know, it is not
       good to respect a person in judgment.
    24    He who saith of the wicked, " He is not guilty," shall be
    25 cursed by the tribes and hateful to the nations : but they who
       reprove shall appear better ; and upon them a blessing shall
       come.
    26    Lips will kiss the things which convey good words.
    27    Prepare thy works for the time of going out, and be in com-
                  76
                         XXX.                                        PROVEKBS.
                Oh.
                       plete preparation for the field and come after me ; then thou
                       shalt build thyself a house.
                28            Be not a false witness against thy fellow citizen, nor give a
                29 loose to thy lips.                      Do not say, " I will use him as he hath used
                       me; and punish him for the injuries he hath done me."
                30            A fool is like a field, and a man void of understanding, like
                31 a vineyard ; if thou lettest them alone, they will be overrun
                       with weeds and grass, and become useless, and their stone
                       fences will be thrown down.
                32           I have at length repented and looked about, with a view to
                33 chuse instruction.                         I am dozing a little                          just taking a short
                                                                                                        —
                34 nap—just infolding my breast with my hands.                                                        If such indeed
                       be thy conduct; poverty will come upon thee like a traveller
                       and want like a swift courier.
                XXX. 15 The leech had three daughters greatly beloved, but
                       these three did not satisfy her—nay even the fourth did not
                       suffice for her to say, There is enough.
                1                 The grave, and lust for women, and land unsatiated with
                      water—nay water and fire will never say, There is enough.
                1            The eye which derideth a father and despiseth the old age
                      of a mother, may the ravens of the valley pick it out, and the
                       young eagles devour it.
                18           There are three things which I cannot perceive, and a fourth
                      which I do not know—the tracks of an eagle in its flying—the
                      footsteps of a serpent on a rock—the marks of a ship crossing
                20 the sea—and theways of a man in youth. Such is the way of an
                      adulterous woman, who having committed the act and washed
                      herself, saith, that she hath done nothing improper.
               21            By three things a land is disturbed, and a fourth it cannot
               22 bear—a servant when he reigneth—a fool when filled with
                23 meat—a handmaid when she expelleth her mistress—and an
                      odious woman when she hath a good husband.
               24            There are four things on the earth which are very small, yet
               25 they are wiser than the wise—the ants, which not having
               26 strength, provide their food in summer—the choirogryllus,
                      which being a feeble nation have built their houses among
               27 rocks—the locusts, which having no king encamp regularly
               28 at the word of command—and the calabotes, which depending
                      on its feelers and being easily caught maketh its abode in the
                      fortresses of kings.
     Ch. XXXI. XXV.                PKOVERBS.
     29        There are three things which march well and a fourth
     30 which is stately in its gait—a young lion the strongest of beasts
         which turneth not aside nor feareth any beast—and a cock
     31 strutting magnanimously among his females—and a he-goat
         marching at the head of a flock—and a king harranguing a
         nation.
     32      If thou sufferest thyself to be elated with joy and engagest
         in battle thou wilt incur disgrace.
     33      Churn milk and there will be butter, and if thou wringest the
         nose, blood will issue forth; so if thou usest provoking lan-
         guage contentions and quarrels will ensue.
     XXXI.        These words of mine have been dictated by God,
         they are the prophecy of a king whom his mother instructed-
      2 What wilt thou keep my son?            What! keep the dictates of
         God.   One right of primogeniture I tell thee, my son.          What
         is it thou son of my womb ?      What is it thou son of my vows ?
      3 Give not thy wealth to women; nor thine understanding and
         thy life for that which will bring sorrow.
      4      Do all things with counsel.         Drink wine with counsel.
      5 Princes are passionate, therefore let them not drink wine, lest
         by drinking they forget wisdom, and become incapable of ad-
         ministering justice to the oppressed.
      6      Give strong drink to those in trouble, and wine to be drunk
         by them who are in sorrow ; that they may forget their distress
         and no more remember their troubles.
      7      Open thy mouth with the word of God, and administer jus-
         tice to all with a sound understanding.
      8      Open thy mouth and judge righteously, and plead the cause
         of the weak and needy.
     XXV.        These are the detached instructions of Solomon winch
         the friends of Hezehias king of Judea copied out.
      2      The glory of God obscureth a matter : but the glory of a
         king giveth a lustre to actions.
      3      Heaven is high and the earth is deep : and the heart of a
         king is unsearchable.
      4      Beat drossy silver and all that is pure will be purified.
      5      Slay the wicked from the presence of a king and his throne
         will be established in righteousness.
      6      Boast not in the presence of a king ; nor range thyself in
             5                                                                                            ;;
            Ch. XXV.                               PEOVEEBS.
                the places of princes : For it is better it should be said to thee
                " Come up hither ; " than that thou shouldst give place at the
                presence of a prince.
             7       Tell what thine eyes have seen.
             8       Enter not hastily into a quarrel : lest thou repent at the last
                when thy friend shall upbraid thee.
             9       In yielding shew no contempt, lest thy friend upbraid thee :
                in which case thy quarrel and enmity will not cease, but last
                till death.
           10        Favour and friendship give freedom.                    .Keep these for thyself
                that thou mayst not be exposed to reproach.                             But keep thy
                ways with a placable temper.
           11        It is an apple of gold in a sardine bracelet, thus to speak
                a word.
           12        A precious sardius is bound to an ear-ring of gold; and a
                word of wisdom to an obedient ear.
           13        As the coming out of snow in harvest is grateful accord-
                ing to the degree of heat : so is a faithful messenger to them
                who send him : for he refresheth the souls of them who em-
           H ploy him.
                     As winds and clouds and rain are conspicuous things ; so is
                he who boasteth for a false gift.
           1         By patience kings have a prosperous journey : and a soft
                tongue breaketh bones.
           16        Having found honey eat just what is sufficient : lest being
                glutted thou vomit it up.
           17        Go seldom to the house of thy friend : lest he be cloyed
                with thee and hate thee.
           18        Sharp is a nail and a sword and an arrow : so is a man
                who beareth false witness against his friend.
           19        The way of a bad man and the foot of a transgressor shall
                be destroyed in an evil day.
           20        As vinegar is hurtful to a boil ; so bodily disease giveth
                pain to the heart.
           21        As a moth in a garment and a worm in wood : so a man's
                grief hurteth the heart.
           22        If thine enemy hunger feed him ; if he be thirsty give him
                drink : for by doing this thou wilt use the means to melt him
                and the Lord will reward thee with good.
        Ch. XXVI.                                          PKOVERBS.
        23           The north wind raiseth clouds : and an impudent counte-
              nance irritateth the tongue.
        24           It is better to dwell in a corner of the house top, than with
               a scolding wife in a wide house.
        25           As cold water is grateful to a thirsty soul ; so is good news
              from a distant country.
        26           As if one should stop up a fountain and destroy an outlet
              of water : so is it disorderly for a righteous man to fall before
              the wicked.
        27           It is not good to eat too much honey : but we ought to
              honour glorious words.
        28           A man who doth any thing without counsel ; is like a city
              which hath the foundations of walls laid and is without walls.
        XXVI.                 As dew at the ingathering of fruit and as rain in har-
              vest : so is honour for a fool.
          2          As birds and ostriches fly away ; so a vain curse will not
              light on any one.
          '.I        As a whip for a horse and a goad for an ass ; so is a scourge
              for a sinful nation.
          4         Answer not a fool conformably to his folly; let thou be-
          5 come like him.                     But answer a fool according to his folly ; that
              he may not think himself wise.
          6         He who sendeth a message by a foolish messenger ; by his
              own ways procureth disgrace.
          7         As well take walking from the legs ; as transgression from
              the mouth of fools.
         8          He who bindeth a stone in a sling is like him who giveth
              honour to a fool.
         9          Thorns stick in the hands of a drunken man ; and slavery in
              the hand of fools.
       10           All the flesh of fools is in a tempest : for their soundest sleep
              is broken.
       11           As a dog becometh odious when he returneth to his vo-
              mit ;      so is a fool for his wickedness, when he returneth to
              his sin.
       12           There is a shame which leadeth to sin : and a shame which
              procureth glory and honour.
       13           I have seen a man who thought himself wise : but there
              was more hope of a fool than of him.
                 81                                                                                                                                 a;
                        XXVII.                                       PKOVEKBS.
               Ch.
               14            A slothful man sent on a journey saith, There is a lion in
                     the way and murderers in the streets.
               15            As a door turneth on its hinges so doth a slothful man on
                      his bed.
               lG            A slothful man having hid his hand in his bosom cannot
                     bring it out to his mouth.
               17           A slothful man thinketh himself wiser than him who in
                      plenty carrieth a message.
                            He who meddleth with another's strife, is like one who
                      taketh a dog by the tail.
               1            As they who undertake to cure throw out words for men ;
                      and he who falleth in with the proposal will be first supplant-
               19 ed; so all who ensnare their friends, when they are found out
                      say, I did it in sport.
               20            By much fuel a fire is nourished : but where there is no
                      stirrer up of quarrels, contention ceaseth.
               2             A hearth is for coals and fuel for fire : and a contentious
                      man for the bustle of strife.
               22            The words of the crafty are soft : but they pierce the
                      inmost recesses of the soul.
               23            Silver given with deceit, should be accounted as a potsherd.
                             Smooth lips disguise a wicked heart.
               24           A weeping enemy assenteth to every thing with his lips :
                      but in his heart he contriveth deceit.
              25            Though an enemy intreat thee with a loud voice, believe
                     him not : for in his heart there is seven fold wickedness.
              26            He who concealeth enmity practiseth deceit ; but being
                     found out he discloseth his sins in publick assemblies.
              27            May he who diggeth a pit for his neighbour fall into it
                     and he who rolleth a stone, roll it on himself.
              28            A lying tongue hateth truth ; and a flattering mouth work-
                     eth ruin.
              XXVII.                    Boast not of things of to-morrow ; for thou knowest not
                     what the coming day will bring forth.
                 2          Let a neighbour praise thee and not thine own mouth—
                     stranger and not thine own lips.
                 3          A stone is heavy and sand is weighty ; but a fool's anger
                     is heavier than both.
                               I
          Ch. XXVI                                             PBOVEBBS.
            4          Wrath is cruel and anger outrageous : but nothing can
                withstand envy.
           5           Open rebukes are better than concealed love.
            6         More faithful are the wounds of a friend ; than the feigned
                kisses of an enemy.
           7          A full soul loatheth a honey comb : but to a hungry soul
                even bitter things are sweet.
           8          As a bird when taken hooded from its nest ; so is a man
               reduced to slavery, when removed from his country.
           9          With myrrh and wine and perfumes the heart is cheered :
               but with misfortunes the spirit is broken.
         10           Thine own friend and thy father's friend forsake not ; but
               when unfortunate go not to the house of thy brother.
                      Better is a friend near at hand, than a brother far off.
         11           Be wise, my son that thy heart may rejoice, and remove
               from thee reproachful speeches.
         12           When ills approach, a prudent man is hidden : but the
               simple pass on to their sorrow.
         13           Take away his mantle, for a scorner passed by who wast-
               eth the property of others.
         14          He who blesseth a friend with a loud voice, rising early,
               will appear not unlike one who curseth him.
        15           A continual dropping driveth a man out of his house in a
              rainy day : and so doth a contentious wife.
        16           Boreas is a harsh wind, though it be called by an honour-
               able name.
        17           Iron sharpeneth iron, but a man exasperateth the face of a
              companion.
        18           He who planteth a fig tree shall eat of its fruit ;                                                and he
              who guardeth his master shall be honoured.
        19          As faces do not resemble faces : so neither do the thoughts
              of men.
        20           The grave and destruction are never satisfied : in like man-
              ner the eyes of men are insatiable.
                     He who hath staring eyes, and fools who cannot govern
              their tongue ; are an abomination to the Lord.
       21           Fire is the trier of gold and silver :                                   but a man is tried by
              the mouth of them who praise him.
                       vol. it.                                    s s
                                                         —                                                          ;
                    XXVIII.                          PKOVEKBS.
             Oh.
                        The heart of a transgressor seeketh evils :                           but a righteous
                  heart seeketh knowledge.
             22         Though thou shouldst whip a fool publickly and disgrace
                  him : thou canst not take away his folly.
             23        Be careful to know the state of thy 'flock; and pay close
             24 attention to thy herd : for wealth and power do not continue
                  with a man forever ; nor can he transmit them from one gene-
                  ration to another.
            25         Take care of the herbage in thy field : mow grass and
            26 collect provender from the hills :                        that thou mayst have sheep
                  for clothing.
            27         Honour the field that thou mayst have lambs.
                       My son, thou hast sayings from me powerfully conducive
                 to thy life : and the life of thy servants.
            XXVIII.               The wicked fleeth when none pursueth : but the
                 righteous is bold as a lion.
              2        Contentions are raised by the sins of the wicked : but a pru-
                 dent man extinguisheth them.
             3        A mighty man by wicked acts oppresseth the poor.
                      As a sweeping rain is indeed unprofitable, so are they who
             4 forsake the law and applaud iniquity : but they who love the
                 law encompass themselves with a wall.
             5        Bad men will not understand judgment : but they who
                 seek the Lord will be wise in every thing.
             6        Better is a poor man who walketh in truth than a rich liar.
             7        A wise son keepeth the law ; but he who feedeth prodi-
                 gality dishonoureth his father.
             8        He who increaseth his wealth by usury and unjust gain
                 gathereth it for him who will pity the poor.
             9        As for him who turneth away his ear from hearkening to
                 the law ; even his prayer is an abomination.
            10        He who causeth the righteous to wander in an evil way
                 shall himself fall into destruction.
                          The upright shall have good things in possession : but
            11 the unrighteous shall pass by good things and shall not enter
                 into them.
                      A rich man is wise in his own conceit.                               But a poor man
                 who hath understanding will find him out.
                                                                                                                            ;
                XXIX.                                  PROVERBS.
         Ch.
         12          For helping the righteous there is great glory : but in the
               places of the wicked ; men are entrapped.
         13         He who covereth his wickedness shall not prosper; but he
               who confesseth and forsaketh will be beloved.
         14         Happy the man who piously feareth all things : but he who
               is of an intractable temper will fall into evils.
         15          He who ruleth over a poor nation, himself being poor, is a
              hungry lion and a ravening wolf.
         16         Aking straitened in his revenue is a great oppressor : but he
               who hateth injustice shall live long.
         17         He who is bail for a man in a case of murder, shall be a fu-
               gitive, but not in safety.
                    Correct a son and he will love thee and be an ornament to
              thy life.        He will not hearken to an unrighteous nation.
         18             He who walketh righteously will be helped : but he who
              walketh in crooked ways will be entangled.
        19          He who tilleth his own ground shall have plenty of bread
               but he who followeth idleness, shall have plenty of poverty.
         20          A faithful man will be much praised ; but the wicked shall
              not escape punishment.
         21              He who regardeth not the persons of the righteous, is not
              good : such a one will deliver up a man for a morsel of bread.
         22              An envious man hasteth to be rich, and knoweth not that
              the bountiful shall have mastery over him.
        23          He who reproveth a man's ways shall have more thanks
              than he who hath a flattering tongue.
        24          He who casteth off a father or mother and thinketh that
              he doth not sin ; is indeed the partner of an impious man.
        25          A faithless man judgeth rashly : but he who trusteth in the
              Lord will be careful.
        26          He who putteth confidence in the boldness of his heart is
              a fool : but he who walketh wisely shall be saved.
        27          He who giveth to the poor shall not be in want : but he
              who turneth away his eyes shall be indigent.
        28              In the places of the wicked, the righteous groan : but by
              their destruction, the righteous will be multiplied.
        XXIX.                Better is a man of experience, than a man who is
             stiff-necked :           for when the latter is suddenly burned, there is
              no healing him.
                                                                                                                                          :
                     XXIX.                                   PEOVEEBS.
              Ch.
                2          When the righteous are applauded the people will rejoice
                    but when the wicked bear rule, men will mourn.
                3          When a man loveth wisdom his father is gladdened : but
                    he who feedeth harlots spendeth his substance.
                4              A righteous king raiseth a country ; but a transgressor
                    overthroweth it.
                5             He who shall provide a net to catch his friend ; spreadeth
                    it for his own feet.
                6              For a mighty transgressor there is a great snare ; but the
                   just shall have joy and gladness.
               7          A righteous man is skilled in administering justice to the
                    poor : but the wicked doth not take due cognisance : nor hath
                    he a feeling heart for the poor.
               8          Men regardless of law, set a city in a flame : but wise men
                    avert wrath.
               9          A wise man shall judge nations : but a fool when angry is
                    derided and terrifleth not.
             10           Men stained with blood hate one who is holy : but the up-
                   right will make strict inquest for his life.
             11           A fool sheweth all his wrath ; but a wise man dispenseth
                   it gradually.
             12           When a king hearkeneth to falsehood, all under him are
                   transgressors.
             13           When creditor and debtor meet each other ; the Lord hath
                   a watch over both.
             14           When a king judgeth the poor faithfully; his throne will
                   be established for a memorial.
             15           The rod and reproofs give wisdom : but a child led astray
                   shameth his parents.
             16           When the wicked abound, transgressions are multiplied :
                    but when they fall, the righteous are awed.
             17           Correct thy son and he will give thee rest ; and add honour
                    to thy life.
             18           With a sinful nation an instructor can not continue : but he
                    who keepeth the law is most happy.
             19           A stubborn servant will not be instructed by words : for
                    though he may understand he will not obey.
             20           If thou seest a man hasty in his words : be assured there is
                    more hope of a fool than of him.
                                                                                                                                     :;
                XXXI.                                    PROVERBS.
       Ck.
       21           He who feedeth delicately from his youth, shall be a ser-
              vant and at last afflicted with sorrow.
       22           A passionate man stirreth up strife :                                      but a furious man is
             a digger up of sin.
       23           A man's pride will bring him low : but the Lord will glo-
             riously support the humble.
       24           He who is partner with a thief hateth his own soul : and so
              do they, who hear an oath administered, if they do not make
              discovery.
       25           They who fear and reverence men have been supplanted
              but he whose trust is in the Lord shall be gladdened.
                    Impiety causeth a man to fall : but he who trusteth in the
              Lord shall be safe.
       26           Many court the favour of princes : but justice cometh to a
              man from the Lord.
       27           A righteous man is an abomination to an unjust man : and
              a straight course is an abomination to a transgressor.
       XXXI. 10                        AVho can find a virtuous woman? Such a one is
              indeed more valuable than precious stones.
       11           The heart of her husband trusteth in her : such a one hath
       1 2 no need of spoils : for she laboureth for her husband's good
              all her life long.
       13           Having spun wool and flax she made a useful work with her
       14 hands.              She was like a merchant vessel which bringeth riches
       15 from afar :                 She arose by night and gave food to her house-
       16 hold and work to her maids.                                  Having viewed a field she bought
       17 it, and with the fruits of her hands planted the purchase.                                                         Hav-
              ing girded herself tight about the waist, she strengthened her
        18 arms for work.                         And finding that it was good to work, her
        19 lamp is not extinguished the whole night.                                              Her elbows she ex-
              tendeth over the spindle ;                            and her hands she keepeth at the
        20 distaff.            But she opened her hand to the needy ; and stretched
        21 out her handful to the distressed.                                         Her husband when long
              abroad is not concerned for those at home :                                              for all with her
        22 are well clothed.                      She made for her husband double garments
        23 and for herselfrobes ofcotton and purple. And herhusband is dis-
              tinguished in the gates ; when he sitteth in council with the elders
        24 ofthe land. She made sindons and sold girdles to the Chananites.
              She opened her mouth sparingly and with propriety ; and had
           Oh. XXXI.                               PROVERBS.
           25 her tongue in due subjection.                    She clothed herself with niajes-
           26 ty and excellence, and enjoyed delights in her latter days.                              The
                gates of her house were kept close shut;                        and she eateth not
           27 the bread of idleness.                She openeth her mouth with wisdom,
           28 and maxims of prudence.                    Her bounty caused her children to
                honour her ; for they were rich, and her husband praised her.
           29        Many daughters have possessed wealth, many have acted
                virtuously :       but thou hast surpassed—thou hast excelled all.
           30        False are allurements, and vain the beauty of a wife.                           For a
                woman of understanding is blessed. Let her therefore praise the
           31 fear of the Lord.             Give her of the fruits of her hands ; and let
                her husband be praised in the gates.
                                               ECCLESIASTES.
           I.      The words of the preacher the son of David, king of Israel
                                                   in Jerusalem.
             2       Vanity of vanities, said the preacher.                      Vanity of vanities.
                All is vanity.
             3       What lasting advantage hath a man by all the labour with
             4 which he toileth under the sun ? One generation passeth away
                and another cometh.               But the earth hath continually kept its
                station.
             5       The sun riseth and the sun setteth and cometh round to
             6 his place.         Rising there he marcheth southward, then wheeleth
             7 about to the north.              The wind wheeleth in circuits, and in its
                circuits it returneth.           All the rivers run into the sea, yet the sea
                is not filled.       To the place whence the rivers come, thither they
             8 return to continue their course.                    All these considerations are
                wearisome.         Man cannot recount them: nor can the eye be sa-
                tisfied with seeing ; nor the ear filled with hearing.
             9       What is that which hath been ? The very same which shall
                be.    And what is that which hath been done ? The very same
                which shall be done : for there is nothing entirely new under
           1    the sun.       Who can speak and say, Behold this is entirely new.
                It hath been already in the ages past which were before us.
           11 There is no remembrance of former things : and of those
                things which shall happen hereafter, there will be no remem-
                brance among them who shall be born at a remote period.
                                                  ECCLESIASTES.
        Ch. II.
        12          I the preacher was king over Israel in Jerusalem ; and I
        13 applied my heart to seek and make diligent search by wisdom
              concerning all the things which are done on the earth.                                                  Be-
              cause God hath assigned to the sons of men painful employ-
        14 inent, that they may be kept employed, I took a view of all
              the different sorts of work which are done under the sun.
        Jo xlnd behold they are all vanity and vexation of spirit.                                                  That
              which is crooked cannot be made straight, nor can wants be
              numbered.
        16          I communed with my heart, saying, Behold I am become
              great and have made advances in wisdom above all who were
              before me in Jerusalem.                      And I have applied my mind to know
        17 wisdom and knowledge.                            And my mind hath taken a view of
              many things—of wisdom and knowledge—of parables and
        18 science.            I have found by experience that this also is indeed
              vexation of spirit.
        II.          Because by much wisdom there is much knowledge; and
          1 he who addeth to his knowledge will add to his sorrow ; I said
              in my heart, Come now let me try thee with pleasure.                                              Take a
              view of that considered as a good.                             But behold this also is va-
          2 nity.        To laughter I said, It is madness ; and to mirth, What is
              this thou art doing ?
          3         Now I had examined whether my mind could lead my
              flesh to wine             and my mind had led it with wisdom, retaining
                                     ;
              a command over pleasure, until I should see of what sort that
              good is, which the sons of men are to pursue under the sun,
          4 all the days of their life.                     I enlarged my plan of operations.                             I
          5 built me houses.                  I planted me vineyards.                     I made me gardens
          6 and orchards and planted therein all sorts of fruit trees.                                          I made
              me pools of water, to water from them my blooming nurse-
          7 ries.        I purchased men servants and maid servants; and had
              servants born in my family.                         And my stock of herds and flocks
          8 was great above all who were before me in Jerusalem.                                                  I col-
              lected also for myself silver and gold and the choicest treasures
              of kings and countries.                        I got me men singers and women
              singers, and the delights of the sons of men—a butler and the
          9 requisites to entertainments.                            And I was great and surpassed
              all who had been before me in Jerusalem ; and still my wisdom
        10 continued with me.                        And whatever mine eyes desired I with-
         8                                                                    ——
                                   ECCLESIASTES.
         Ch. II.
             held not from them, nor did I restrain my heart from all my
             pleasure.
                Because my heart had been gladdened with all my labour,
         11 (now this was my portion from all my labour) therefore I look-
            ed back on all the works which my hands had done, and on
            the labour with which I had toiled to execute them ; and be-
            hold all was vanity and vexation of spirit and there is no last-
            ing advantage under the sun.
         12     Then I looked back to take a view of wisdom and mad-
            ness and folly.   In all the particulars which formed this delibe-
         13 ration (for who is the man equal to a compleat investigation)
            I saw indeed that there is an advantage in wisdom above fol-
        14 ly, like the advantage of light above darkness.       The wise man's
            eyes are in his head ; but the fool walketh in darkness.      Never-
        15 theless I knew that one event will happen to them all. Therefore I
            said in my heart, As the same event will happen to me as hap-
            peneth to the fool, why have I studied wisdom ? Why com-
            muned abundantly withmyheart ? Because even this is vanity
        16 (since out of an abundance the fool speaketh)—because there
            is no remembrance forever of the wise man more than of the
            fool (seeing the days are now coming when all shall be for-
        17 gotten and the wise must die as well as the fool) therefore I
            hated the whole of this life ; because the work which was done
            under the sun was toilsome to me—because all are vanity and
        1   vexation of spirit :   and I hated all this labour of mine for
            which I am toiling under the sun ; because I must leave it to a
            man who is coming after me; and who knoweth whether he
        19 shall be a wise man or a fool?       Now if he hath power over all
            my labour for which I have toiled and in which I have dis-
            played wisdom under the sun ; surely this is vanity.
        20      Then I turned about that my heart might state distinctly
            in every labour of mine in which I had toiled under the sun
        21 that here is a man whose labour hath been with wisdom and
            with knowledge, and with ability ; and there is a man to whom,
            though he did not labour fur him, he shall give his portion.
        22 Surely this is vanity and a great vexation—That such is the
            case with another man by all his labours and the vexation of
        23 his heart with which he toileth under the sun, that all his days
            are days of sorrow and his employment grief, and even at night
            his heart hath no rest.   Surely this is vanity.
                                                                     —
                               ECCLESIASTES.
      Ch. III.
      24     (a) Hathnot a man something good which he can eat and drinh
         and which he canpoint out to his soul as a good hy his labour ?
      25    (b) With respect to that I saw indeed that even this is from
         the hand of God ; for who can eat or who can drink without
      26 him?   For to the man who is good in his sight he hath given
         wisdom and knowledge and joy ; and to the sinner he hath
         given the trouble of gathering and heaping up to give to him
         who is good in the sight of God.  So that this also is vanity and
         vexation of spirit.
      III.    Time is for all things : but there is a particular portion of
       2 time for every particular affair under heaven—a time to be born
       3 and a time to die—a time to plant and a time to root up what
         was planted—a time to kill and a time to heal—a time to pull
         down and a time to build up—a time to weep and a time to
       4 laugh—a time to mourn and a time to dance—a time to cast
       5 away stones and a time to gather stones together—a time to
       6 embrace and a time to refrain from embracing—a time to seek
       7 and a time to lose—a time to keep and a time to throw away
         a time to rend and a time to sew—a time to be silent and a
       8 time to speak—a time to love and a time to hate—a time of
       9 war and a time of peace.  What is the lasting advantage of the
      10 agent from the things in which he laboureth ?  I have taken a
         collective view of all the business which God hath assigned to
     11 the sons of men to be exercised therewith.       All the things
         which he made, considered as a whole, are good in his time.
         But with regard to all things considered as one tohole, to them
         he hath assigned the whole age ; so that no man can find out
     12 the work which God hath done from beginning to end.      I have
     13 found that there is no good in them (I mean in regard to every
         man who eateth and drinketh, and can see good in all his la-
         bour) if there is not a gift of God that he may be made glad
      14 and do good in his life. I have found that all the things which
         Godhath made shall continue their age ; there is no adding to it
         nortakingfrom it ; and that God hath acted that they maybe aw-
      15 ed at his presence. What hath been is now ; and what are to be
         have already been ; and God will find out him who is persecut-
      16 ed : and yet I saw under the sun a place of judgment ; was the
                       (a) an objection, (b) the answer.
            VOL. IT.                T t
                                                                         —
                                ECCLESIASTES.
        Oh. IV.
           wicked there ? and a place for the just ; was the pious there ?
        17 Then I said in my heart God will judge the whole class of the
           righteous, and the whole class of the wicked.    For there is a
           time for every thing ; and he is there over all the work.
        18     I communed with my heart concerning a saying of the sons
           of men, " That God distinguisheth them.11     Now in order to
        19 shew that they themselves are beasts, that at least which be-
            falleth man, befalleth them ; and that which befalleth the beast
           befalleth man.   The same event happeneth to both.   Asthe one
            dieth, so doth the other.And they have all one breath.   What
            advantagethen hath man over the beast ?   None : for all are va-
        20 nity.  They are all for one place.   They were all from dust:
        21 andto dust they shall all return. Andwho hath seen the breath
           of the sons of men whether it ascendeth upwards ; and the
           breath of the beast, whether it descendeth downwards into the
        22 earth?   So I saw that there is nothing good in the works of
            man, but that by which he can be made glad ; for that is his
            portion, for who will bring him to see what will be after him ?
        IV.     Then I turned and took a view of all the different sorts of
            oppression under the sun ; and behold the tear of the oppress-
            ed and they have no comforter.   Though from the hand of op-
          2 pressors some have relief; yet others have no comforter.There-
            fore I praised the whole body of the dead—those who were
          3 already dead, above the living—those who are still alive : but
            better than both is he who hath never been—who hath not seen
            all the evil work which is done under the sun.
          4    In the review of labour in general, I took a view in parti-
            cular of manly exertion in executing.   Because this causeth a
            man to be envied by his neighbour, this therefore is vanity and
          5 vexation of spirit.  The fool folded his hands and devouring
          6 his flesh said, Better is one handful of rest than two handfuls
            of labour and vexation of spirit.
          7     Then I turned and took a view of a vanity under the sun
          8 Here is a single individual who hath no second ; at least he hath
            neither son nor brother, yet there is no end to all his labour.
            His eye is not satisfied with riches, yet doth he say, For whom
            do I labour and deprive my soul of good ?  Surely this is vanity
          9 and a sore vexation. Twoare better than one.   They have a bet-
         10 ter reward for their labour. For if they chance to fall the one
                             ECCLESIASTES.
    Ch. V.
       can raise up his fellow.  But alas for him who is alone, when
    11 he falleth and hath not another to raise him up.    Again if two
       lie together they have warmth : but how can one be warm who
    12 is alone ?  Again though one should be strong the two may
       withstand him, and a three fold cord cannot easily be broken-
    13     Better is a poor and wise subject than an old and foolish
    14 king who hath not yet learned how to conduct himself; for
    15 out of prison he may come to reign.     Because even in his own
       kingdom he was needy, I took a view of the whole body of
       the living who were walking under the sun with the youth
    10 second in rank who is to succeed him.     There is no end of all
       the people—of all who resorted to them.      Yet they who come
       last will have no joy in him.     Surely this also is vanity and
       vexation of spirit.
    V.     Keep thy foot when thou goest to the house of God, and
       let thy sacrifice be a readiness to hear rather than the oblation
       of fools. Because they are not sensible that they do amiss, be
     2 thou not rash with thy mouth ; nor let thy heart be hasty to
       utter a word in the presence of G-od.    Because God is in the
       heaven above, and thou art on the earth, let thy words there-
     3 fore be few.   Because a dream cometh by much temptation,
     4 and a fool's voice with many words ; when thou vowest a vow
        to God delay not the performance of it.  For in fools there is no
     5 fixed will.  Pay thou therefore what thou vowest.    It is better
        not to vow, than to vow and not perform.        Suffer not thy
     6 mouth to cause thy flesh to sin, nor say in the presence of
        God, It was an inadvertence, that God may not be provoked
     7 to wrath by thy voice, and destroy the works of thy hands,
       because it was with a multitude of dreams and vanities, and
       many words that thou fearest God.
      8     If thou seest a frivolous accusation of a poor man, and a
        rigorous exaction of judgment and justice in a country, mar-
        vel not at the matter. Because there is a high one over a high
        one to watch, and high ones are for these things, and the profit
     9 of land is for every one, a king is appendant to the cultivated
    10 field.  Alover of silver cannot be satisfied with silver ; but did
        any one ever love what the abundance of this produceth ?
    11 Surely this is vanity.   By an abundance of wealth they who
        consume it are multiplied.   And what is the mighty advantage
        of the owner from it ?   That he hath the first si^ht of it with
                                                                             —;
         Ch. VI.                    ECCLESIASTES.
         12 his eyes ?   The sleep of the slave is sweet whether he eateth
            little or much.   But the fulness of the rich suffereth him not
            to sleep.
         13     There is a weakness which I have seen under the sun
         14 riches kept by one for his descendant to his own hurt.         Yet
            these riches acquired with grievous vexation shall perish, and
         15 he hath begotten a son, and there is nothing in his hand.       As
            he came naked out of his mother's womb, he shall turn about
            and go as he came.    He shall take nothing by his labour to go
         16 with him in his hand.         Surely this a grievous weakness
            for as he came, so he must depart.      What then is his lasting
        17 advantage, for which he laboureth in vain ; and for which all
            his days are in darkness and mourning, and much grief and
            weakness and repining ?
        18      Behold I have seen a good which is comely, namely to
            eat and drink, and to have a good enjoyment in all the labour
            with which one toileth under the sun, the number of the days
            of his life which God hath given him ; for this is his portion.
        19 And every man indeed to whom God hath given riches and
            wealth, and granted him power to eat thereof, and to take his
            portion, hath by means of his being made glad in his labour,
        20 this further gift of God, that he will not much remember the
            days of his life, because God occupieth him with the joy of
            his heart.
        VI.     There is an evil which I have seen under the sun, and it
         2 is common among men—a man to whom God giveth riches
            and wealth and glory, so that he wanteth nothing for his soul
           of all that he can desire ; but God granteth him not a power
         3 to eat thereof.  In as much as a stranger is to devour it, this is
           vanity and grievous infirmity.     Though a man should beget a
           hundred children and live many years, if during that multi-
           tude of years which his days shall continue, his soul shall not
           be satisfied with an enjoyment of good, and he hath got no
           burying place, I conclude that an Abortive is better than he.
         4 Grant that it came in vanity and goeth away in darkness ; with
         5 darkness also his name shall be covered!      It indeed never saw
         6 the light ; and he never knew rest : it hath an advantage over
           him though he had lived the revolutions of a thousand years,
           if he never enjoyed good.    Do not all go to one place ?
     Cli. VII.                  ECCLESIASTES.
      7     All the labour of a man is for the mouth ; yet the appetite
      8 will not be satisfied : here then a wise man hath the advantage
        over a fool ; since the poor man knoweth that to pass through
      9 life, what he sees with the eyes is better for him than to be
        wandering after appetite, which is indeed vanity and vexation
        of spirit.
     10     Whatever hath been is now called by its name, and it is
        known what man is who cannot contend with one who is
        stronger than he.
     11     Since there are many arguments to prove the abundance
        of vanity ; is there any one thing better than another for man ?
     12 Doth any one know what is good for man in this life?          All the
        days of his life of vanity he hath indeed done these things un-
        der a shade ; is there any who can tell him what will be after
        him under the sun ?
     VII.     A good name is better than precious oil ; and the day of
      2 death, than a birth day.     It is better to go to a house of mourn-
        ing than to a house of feasting.       As that is the end of every
        man therefore      the living will improve his understanding.
      3 Grief is better than laughter ; for by a sadness of countenance
     4 aheart may be made better.       The heart of the wise is in a house
     5 of mourning ; but the heart of fools, in a house of mirth.           It
        is better for a man to hear the rebuke of the wise, than to lis-
     6 ten to the song of tools.     Like the crackling of thorns under a
     7 pot, so is the laughter of fools.   Surely this also is vanity.    Be-
        cause oppression distracteth a wise man and destroyeth his
        good disposition, the final sentence is better than such a go-
     8 vernment. Better is a patient man than one of a haughty spirit.
     9      Be not apt to be grieved in spirit ; for grief will rest in the
    10 bosom of fools.    Say not, How happened it that the former days
    11 were better than these?        For thou hast not inquired wisely
        concerning this.    Wisdom is good with an inheritance ; and it
        is an advantage to them who see the sun, that they are in the
    12 shade of it.    Wisdom is like the shade of money ; but the ad-
        vantage of the knowledge of wisdom is—it will give life to
    13 him who is a follower of it. Contemplate the works of God ; for
        who can make him straight whom God hath made crooked.
    14 In the days of prosperity enjoy good ; but consider in the day
        of adversity—consider that God hath made the one in due
                  1
                        VIII.                                    ECCLESIASTES.
               Ch.
                      proportion to the other, forming a whole, as hath been said,
                      that man cannot find out any of his ways.
               15            In the days of my vanity I took a view of all classes.                                                             Here
                      is a righteous man perishing for his righteous act : there a
               16 wicked man continuing in his wickedness.                                                         Be not over right-
                      eous ; nor dive too far into wisdom, lest peradventure thou be
               17 struck with astonishment.                                       Run not into an excess of wicked-
                      ness nor become hardened, that thou mayst not die untimely.
               18 It is good to restrain thyself in the one case ; and surely for the
                19 other consideration thou shouldst not pollute thy hand.                                                                          Be-
                      cause to them who fear God all things may happen, wisdom
                      will help the wise man more than ten mighty men who are in
               20 the city. Because there is not a righteous man on earth who will
               2      do good and not commit sin, therefore thou shouldst not pay too
                      close attention to all the words which the wicked shall utter,
               22 that thou mayst not hear thy servant cursing thee.                                                                   For many
                      a time he may revile thee and in many ways vex thy heart, be-
                      cause thou perhaps in like manner didst curse others.
               23             Having proved all these things by wisdom, I said, Let me
               24 investigate the cause.                                But that was far removed from me ; far-
                       ther than it was.                    It is indeed a deep depth, who can find it out ?
               25             I took a circuit with my heart to know and examine care-
                       fully and to seek wisdom and a mode of calculating, and to
                       gain a knowledge of a particular folly and disquietude and
                26 madness of one destitute of the fear of God ; and I find and
                       can declare, That bitterer than death is that whole class of wo-
                       men who are prostitutes.                                Though their heart is nets and their
                       hands chains, he who is good in the sight of God shall be de-
                27 livered from them ; but a sinner shall be taken by them.                                                                          Be-
                       hold this I found (said the preacher) examining them one by
                28 one to find a class which my soul earnestly sought, but I did
                       not find : though I found one man of a thousand, yet a woman
                29 among all these I did not find : but behold this I found, that
                       God made mankind upright ; but they have found out many
                       classes.
                VIII.                Doth any one know wise men?                                          Doth any one know the
                       solution of a matter?                                Wisdom will make his countenance
                        shine ; but one of an unblushing countenance will be hated.
                   2           Watch the mouth of a king, and in regard to the oath of
               VIII.                                 ECCLESIASTES.
       Ch.
         3 God be not impatient.                              From his presence thou inayst with-
              draw.         Stay not when he giveth wicked orders; for he will do
         4 what he pleaseth, as a king is absolute ; and who can say to
         5 him, What dost thou?                               He who keepeth a command will not
             acknowledge it to be—a wicked order ; but a wise man's heart
              knoweth the time of judgment, that—there is a time and a
          6 judgment for everything.                                Because the man's determination
          7 may be much against him—because none knoweth what may
          8 happen, who can tell him what may come to pass ?                                                      No man is
              absolute commander over wind to stop the current of it, and
              over the day of death he hath no authority ; nor is there a dis-
                                                                                      wickedness                                 7ho
              charge in the day of battle ; nor can                                                         save him w
              is under its sway.
          9          Having taken a view of this as a whole, I applied my heart
              to every work which is done under the sun—to all those things
        10 in which man exerciseth authority over man to his hurt.                                                             And
              I then saw wicked menicarried to their graves, even out of this
              holy place ; and when they were gone, they were praised in
               the city, because they had done as they did.                                           Surely this is va-
        il nity.           Because those who do evil are not speedily called to an
               account, therefore the heart of the children of men is fully set
        12 in them to do evil.                            He who sinned continued thenceforward
               to do evil, even because of the forbearance shewn to them.
              Now as I know that it is good for them who fear God, that
        13 they should be awed by his presence; and that it cannot be
               well with the wicked ; and that he who is not awed by the pre-
               sence of God cannot prolong his days at ease ; this which is
               practised on earth is vanity.
         14           Because there are righteous men on whom cometh as it
               were the work of the wicked ; and because there are wicked
               men on whom cometh, as it were, the work of the righteous,
         15 I said that this is also surely vanity ; and I praised pleasurable
               enjoyment, because there is nothing good for men under the
               sun—nothing save eating and drinking and being made glad ;
               andthis one may have conjoined with his labour all the days of
               his life which God giveth him under the sun.
         16           In all those things to which I applied my heart to know
                wisdom and to take a view of the business which is done on
         17 the earth ; because day and night this is never at rest, therefore
                                                                  —
           IX.               ECCLESIASTES.
       Ch.
          I took a view of all the works of God in classes ; for man is in-
          capable of finding out the whole system of things under the
          sun.  Let a man labour ever so much in the search he cannot
       IX.   find it out ; and let a wise man say ever so much of knowing he
          cannot find it ; for this cause I laid this whole system before my
          heart, and my heart took a view of it.As the righteous and
          the wise and their works are in the hand of God, man indeed
          knoweth not what to love or what to hate : with regard to all
        2 things before him there is vanity in them all.The same event
          happeneth to the righteous and to the wicked ; to the good,
          and to the bad ; to the clean and to the unclean ; to him who
          sacrificeth and to him who sacrificeth not : as is the good, so is
          the sinner ; as is he who sweareth, so is he who feareth the
        3 oath.  There is this evil in every thing done under the sun,
          that one event happeneth to them all, so that the heart of the
          children of men being filled with evil there is an instability in
          their heart during their life, and it followeth them to the dead.
        4 Because whoever is in society with all the living hath hope
          because the dog which is alive is better than the lion which is
        5 dead—because they who are alive must know that they shall
          die ; but the dead are not sensible of any thing and there is no
        6 more a portion for them—because the remembrance of these is
          forgotten, and their love and their hatred and their envy are al-
          ready perished and they have no more forever a portion in
        7 any thing done under the sun ; come eat thy bread with cheer-
          fulness, and drink thy wine with a good heart : because God
        8 hath approved of thy works, let thy garments be always white ;
        9 and let not oil be wanting on thy head : enjoy life also with
           the wife whom thou lovest all the days of thy life of vanity^
           which are given thee under the sun : for this is thy portion in
           this life of thine, and this thy labour with which thou toilest
        10 under the sun.Whatever thy hand findeth to do, do it with all
          thy might ; since there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge,
           nor wisdom in the mansion of the dead to which thou must go.
        11    Having turned about, I saw under the sun that the race is
           not to the swift, nor the battle to the mighty ; nay not even
           bread to the wise, nor riches to men of understanding ; nor fa-
           vour to men of knowledge—that time and chance will happen
           to them all as forming one whole.That man indeed no more
           X.                        ECCLESIASTES.
     Oh.
          knoweth his time than the fishes which are enclosed in an evil
          dredge, or than birds which are caught in a net.                Like them the
          sons of men are drawn into an evil time when it cometh upon
          them suddenly.
      13      This also I saw under the sun in regard to wisdom which
     14 with me is in high estimation.              There was a small city and few
          meninit. And there came against it a mighty king who besieged
          it and built great ramparts against it ; but he happened to find
      15 in it a poor wise beggar, and this man by his wisdom saved
          the city ; yet no man remembered the class of this poor beg-
      16 gar.     Now I have said, Wisdom is better than power, yet the
          wisdom of this poor man is despised and his words are not re-
      17 yarded.      The words of wise men in a time of rest are more
          minded than the shout of men exercising authority in the bus-
      1S ties of folly.      Wisdoni is better than implements of war.                 One
     X.        sinner indeed will destroy much good.                    Dead flies will
       '1 spoil the best prepared perfumes : but the smallest portion of
       3 wisdom is of more value than the greatest glory of folly.                      The
          heart of a wise man is on his right : but the heart of a fool is at
          his left.    In every way at least when a fool is on his march his
          heart will fail him so that all which he shall devise is folly.
       4       If the spirit of a ruler rise up against thee, resign not thy
          place : for a reconciliation will mollify great offences.
       5      There is an evil which I have seen under the sun as if some-
          thing involuntary came forth from the presence of a person in
       6 authority.      The fool is set in high stations while the rich shall
       7 sit in a low place.       I have seen slaves on horseback and princes
          walking like slaves on the ground.
       8       Hewho diggeth a pit may fall into it ; and him, who is clear-
       9 ing away a hedge, a serpent may bite. He who raiseth stones high
          may be overpowered by them ; and he who cleareth wood will
      10 thereby incur danger.           If the axe shall fall, or one blunteth its
          edge and redoubled force is to be applied ; the advantage will
      11 be in favour of the man who hath skill.                 If a serpent biteth at
      12 an interval of charming, there is then no advantage in him who
          charmeth.       The words of a wise man's mouth are a charm ; but
      13 the lips of a fool will swallow up himself.             The beginning of the
          words of his mouth is folly and the end of his talk is malicious
      14 madness.       Though the fool multiplieth words, a man doth not
               vol.. II.                          u u
                                                                                                                             ;
             Ch. XT.                                  ECCLESIASTES.
                  know what the matter is ; and what that shall be which will fol-
            15 low who can tell him.                      The labour of the foolish will tire them
                  like that of one who knoweth not the way to a city.
            16          Alas for thee,                 city, whose king is a novice and whose
            17 chiefs eat in the morning.                           Happy thou,                  land, whose king
                  is a son of freemen and whose chiefs eat in due season for
            18 strength : and that they may not be put to shame.                                           By slothful-
                  ness the roof will fall, and by idleness of hands a house will
            19 become leaky, so as to excite a derision of them who are pro-
                  viding bread and wine and oil that they may be regaled while
            20 living.          But to the subjection of money all things will be obe-
                  dient.       Therefore curse not a king in thy mind, and in the
                 inmost recesses of thy bed-chamber curse not a rich man : for
                 a bird of the air will carry thy voice, and that which hath
                 wings will tell thy saying.
            XI.          Send away thy bread on the face of the water; for after
             2 many days thou shalt find it.                               Give a portion to seven and
                 even to eight; for thou knowest not what evil may be on the
             3 earth.          When the clouds are filled with rain they empty them-
                 selves on the earth : and if a tree falleth, whether it be to the
                 south or north, in the place where it shall fall there it shall be.
             4 He who observeth the wind will not sow; and he who looketh
                 at the clouds will not reap.                     In these cases there is no knowing
             5 which way the wind will blow.                                  As thou knowest not how
                 bones are formed in the womb of her who is with child; so
                 thou canst not know the works of God—all that he shall do
             6 forming one system.                     In the morning sow thy seed ; and in the
                 evening let not thy hand forbear; for thou knowest not which
                 will succeed, whether this or that; and should both prosper
                 alike, they are good.
             7         Light is indeed sweet, and it is grateful to the eyes to view
                 the solar system; yet because, though a man may live many
                 years and be delighted in them all, he will still remember that the
             9 days of darkness are many ; that all that is coming is vanity
                 rejoice then,               young man, in thy youth, and let thy heart
                 cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy
                 heart spotless and not by the sight of thine eyes, and know that
           10 for all these things God will bring thee to judgment.                                                There-
                 fore remove wrath from thy heart and put away evil from thy
                 flesh.
      Ch. XII.                  ECCLESIASTES.
      XII.      Because youth and thoughtfulness is vanity, therefore
          remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth ; before the evil
       2 days come and the years draw nigh in which thou shalt say, I
          have no pleasure in them.      So long as the sun and the light
          and the moon and the stars are not involved in darkness, the
       3 clouds will return after rain.     When once the guards of the
          house are shaken, and the men of valour put to flight, and the
       4 grinding maids are idle, because reduced to a few, then shall
          the maids who look out at the windows be darkened, and
          the doors of the market place will be shut at the feebleness of
          the voice of the grinding maid, which will be raised to the
       5 plaintive tone of the young ostrich; and all the daughters of
         the song will be brought low; and they will look up to the
         height and there are terrors in the way.       Though the almond
         tree shall have bloomed and the locust hath been fattened and
         the caper bush is shed, because the man is gone to his long
         home, therefore the mourners have made a circuit in the mar-
       6 ket place.    Until the silver cord can be wound up no more,
         and the golden bowl be broken, and the bucket broken at the
         well, and the wheel on the well shall run down with it, and
       7 dust return to dust as it was, and the spirit return to God who
       8 gave it, vanity of vanities, said the preacher; all things are
         vanity.
       9     And moreover, because the preacher was wise, because he
         taught mankind wisdom ; that the ear might find what is comely
      10 from parables, the preacher made diligent search to find pleas-
      11 ing words and a writing of rectitude—words of truth.            The
         words of the wise are like goads and nails ready made, which
      12 have been laid up in repositories from one shepherd to ano-
         ther.   What remameth of them, my son, keep thou.          There is
         no end of making many books.         And much study is a weari-
         ness to the flesh.
      13     As a conclusion of the discourse, hear thou the whole sum
         and substance.—Fear God and keep his commandments : for
         this conclusion every man should draw, That God will bring
         the whole work into judgment in every case not taken notice
         of, whether it be good or whether it be evil.
                  5                                                                                                                                       :
               Oh. I. II.                            THE SONG OF SOLOMON.
                                                 A Song of Songs which is Solomons.
                 2           LET him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth.
                 3           Because thy breasts are better thau wine ; and the fragrance
                      of thine odours is above all perfumes—Thy name out-poured
                      oil, therefore the virgins have loved thee.                                             Thou art drawn : after
                      thee we will run to the fragrance of thy perfumes.
                             The king brought me into his inner apartment.
                             Let us rejoice and be gladdened by thee.                                                  We will love thy
                      breasts better than wine : rectitude hath loved thee.
                 ;*>         I am brown but comely,                                        daughters of Jerusalem; like
                      the tents of Kedar—like the curtains of Solomon.                                                            Look not on
                      me, because I am of a dark complexion—Because the sun hath
                      looked upon me.                         My mother's children quarrelled with me—
                      They made me a keeper in the vineyards.                                                       Mine own vineyard
                      I did not watch.
                 7           Tell me thou whom my soul loveth, where thou tendest
                      thy flock—Where thou causest it to rest at noon, perhaps I
                      may be like a wanderer among the tents of thy companions.
                 8           If thou wouldst not make thyself known,                                                           fairest of wo-
                      men; go out by thyself in the track of the flock ; and feed thy
                      kids by the shepherds tents.
                 9           To that steed of mine in Pharao's chariot I have compared
              10 thee, my love !                          What! thy cheeks are beautiful as a turtle
               11 dove's: and thy neck as strings of pearls.                                                         We will make for
                     thee suitable figures of gold with spangles of silver.
              12             While the king was at his banquet, my spikenard sent
               13 forth its odour.                         My dear brother is to me a nosegay of stacte
               14 it shall be lodged in my bosom.                                                My dear brother is to me a
                      cluster of the cypress, in the vineyards of Engaddi.
               1              Behold thou art fair, my love ; behold thou art fair.                                                            Thine
                      eyes are doves.
               16            Behold thou art comely, my dear brother—beautiful in-
                      deed !          Near our bed thou wast shaded.
               17            The beams of our houses are cedar.                                                 Cypress our vaulted
                      cielings.
               II.            I am a flower of the field, and a lilly of the vallies.
                  2           As a lilly among thorns, so is my consort among the daugh-
                      ters.
                 3            As the citron tree among the trees of the forests ; so is my dear
                              !                                                                                        —
                                               SOLOMON'S SONG.
        Ch. III.
              brother among the youths.                       In its shade I took great delight and
          4 sat, and its fruit was sweet to my taste.                                      conduct me to the
          5 house of wine, and order for me what I love.                                        Strengthen with
              j)erfumes—strew around me citrons, for I am wounded with
          6 love.        Let his left hand be under my head, and his right em-
              brace me
          7         I have adjured you,                          daughters of Jerusalem, by the
              powers and virtues of the field, that you stir not up nor awake
              my love till she please.
          8 II.       IT is the voice of my dear brother ! lo he cometh, bounding
              over the mountains—skipping over the hills.                                      My dear brother
          9 is like a roe ; or a young hart on the mountains of Baithor.                                             Lo !
             he is behind our wall, looking in at the windows, taking a
        10 near view through the lattice.                            My dear brother addressing me
             saith, " Arise my love, my fair one, my dove !                                    For lo ! the win-
       11 ter is past—the rain is over: is gone.                                    The flowers appear on
       12 the earth—the pruning season is come.                                       The voice of the tur-
        13 tie is heard in our land.                       The fig tree hath put forth its green
             figs:      the vines are in bloom—they have shed a fragrance.
        14 Arise, come my beloved, my fair one, my dove.                                                 Yes, come
             thou dove of mine : in the shelter of the rock near the wall.
             Shew me thy face and let me hear thy voice : for thy voice is
             sweet and thy countenance comely."
       15          Catch for us the little foxes, that spoil vines : for our vines
       16 are in blossom.                  My dear brother is mine and I am his : he is
       17 feeding among the lillies.                            Till the day blow fresh and the
             shades be removed.                    Keturn—Be,                   my dear brother, like a
             roe, or a young hart on the caverned mountains.
       III.          By night on my bed I sought him whom my soul loved.
             I sought him but did not find him.                               I called him but he made
         2 me no answer.                 I will rise now and take a circuit in the city
             in the places of publick resort and in the streets; and seek him
             whom my soul loveth.                        I sought him but did not find him.
         3 The watchmen who take their rounds in the city, met me.
         4 Saw ye him whom my soul loveth?                                      It was but a little while
             after I parted from them, till I found him whom my soul lov-
             eth.      I took hold of him and did not let him go till I brought him
             to my mother's house and into the chambers of her who con-
                                          —                                                                          ;
             Ch. IV,                             SOLOMON'S SONG.
               5 ceived me.            I charged you,                daughters of Jerusalem by the
                   powers aud virtues of the field, not to stir up nor awake my
                   love till he please.
                   III.       WHAT is this coming up from the wilderness ; like a
                   column of smoke, fuming with myrrh and incense made of all
                   the perfumer's powders ?
               7        It is the palanquin of Solomon, three score chiefs of the
               8 chiefs of Israel are around it.                       All swordsmen expert in war.
                  Every man with his sword on his thigh, for fear of danger by
               9 night.        King Solomon had made himself a palanquin of the
             10 wood of Libanus.                 Its columns he made of silver, and his sofa
                  was of gold.            Its canopy was purple, and its inside carpeted
                  with love, for the daughters of Jerusalem.
             11             daughter of Sion go forth and view king Solomon; in
                  the crown with which his mother crowned him ; on the day
                  of his espousals
             IV.         Even on the day of the gladness of his heart.                                     Behold,
                  thou art fair, my love !               Behold thou art fair !                Thine eyes are
                  doves, now thy veil is removed ! thy hair is like the flocks of
               2 goats which are seen from mount Gralaad : thy teeth like the
                  flocks of shorn sheep ; which have just come up from the wash-
                  ing pool : they are all twins and there is not one defective
               3 among them. Thy lips are like a braid of scarlet and thy speech
                  is graceful : as the skin of a pomegranate, so are thy cheeks,
              4 now thy veil is removed.                      Thy neck is like the tower of Da-
                  vid, which was built for an armoury : on it are hung a thou-
               5 sand shields ; all the javelins of the worthies.                             Thy two breasts
                  are like two twin fawns of a roe ; which are browzing among
              6 lillies.       Till the day breeze spring up and the shades are re-
                  moved, I will go by myself to the mountain of myrrh, and to
              7 the hill of frankincense.                    Thou art altogether fair, my love
                  and there is no blemish in thee.
                  IV.        COME from Libanus, my spouse; come from Liba-
                  nus.      Thou canst come, yes come safely from the top of Pis-
                  tis—from the summit of Sanir and Herinon—from lions dens,
              9 from the leopards mountains.                         Thou hast ravished my heart,
                  my sister spouse: thou hast ravished my heart with a glance
                                                                                                                                                    :
        Oh. V.                                         SOLOMON'S SONG.
        10 of thine eyes—with an endearing turn of thy neck.                                                                   How beau-
               tiful are thy breasts, iny sister spouse ! how much more pleas-
               ing than wine are thy breasts ! and the smell of thy garments,
        11 than all spices ! thy lips, my spouse, drop as a honey comb
               honey and milk flow from thy tongue : and the fragrance of
        12 thy garments is like the smell of Lebanon.                                                             Thou art an en-
               closed garden, my sister spouse : a close shut garden ; a sealed
        13 fountain.                  Thy productions are a paradise of pomegranates
               with delicious fruits ; aromatic plants with the varieties of bal-
        14 sams—spikenard and saffron, sweet cane and cinnamon ; with
               all kinds of trees of incense—myrrh, aloth with all the prin-
        15 cipal spices.                      A garden fountain and a well of living water,
               flowing with gentle murmurs from Libanus.
        16             Awake                 north wind, come also,                                    south wind and blow
               gently through my garden, and let my aromatic spices flow.
               Let my dear brother come down to his garden; and taste the
               delicious fruits thereof.
        V.             I have come to my garden, my sister spouse : I have ga-
               thered my myrrh with my spices : I have eaten my bread with
               my honey; I have drunk my wine with my milk.                                                                            Eat,
               friends ; drink—yes drink plentifully                                                brethren.
                V.            I SLEEP; but my heart is awake.                                                    The voice of my
                dear brother ! he knocketh at the door !                                                      " Open to me, my
                sister, my dove, my consecrated one ! for my head is filled
           3 with dew, and my locks with the drops of the night."                                                                       I have
                put off my garment ; how can I put it on?                                                             I have washed
           4 my feet ; how can I defile them ?                                                My dear brother withdrew
                his hand from the hole in the door.                                                      Whereupon my bow-
           5 els yearned for him.                                I rose to open for my dear brother ; my
                hands dropped myrrh ; and my fingers myrrh plenteously
           G on the handles of the bar.                                           I opened for my dear brother.
                He was gone ! my soul melted for the speech of him.                                                                 I sought
                him but did not find him : I called him but he made me no
           7 answer.                They who go the rounds in the city met me.                                                             They
                smote me—they wounded me.                                            The keepers of the walls took
           8 my veil from me.                               I adjured you,                          daughters of Jerusalem
                by the powers and virtues of the field.                                                If you found my dear
                brother— What should you tell him P                                                Tell him that I am sick
                of love.
                                                                                                                                             !             :
                Ch. VI.                                        SOLOMON'S SONG.
                  9           " What is thy dear brother more than another brother, O
                      fairest of women?                           What is thy dear brother more than ano-
                       ther brother, that thou hast thus adjured us ? "
                11            My dear brother is white and ruddy, he is the chief
                                                                                                                                                      est
                       among tens of thousands.                                    His head is gold of Kephas; his
                12 flowing locks black as a raven.                                              His eyes are like doves by
               13 streams of water—milk white doves sitting by streams.                                                                              His
                       cheeks are like beds of spices emitting perfumes ; his lips are
               14 lillies distilling myrrh plenteously.                                           His hands are of gold, finely
                       turned, beset with chrysolites : his body, an ivory cabinet on
               15 a sapphire stone : his legs, pillars of marble fixed on pedestals
                      of gold : his countenance like Libanus, majestic as the cedars
               16 his mouth is sweetness itself.                                       He is altogether lovely.                              Such is
                       my dear brother, and such my love,                                              daughters of Jerusalem.
               VI.              "Where did thy dear brother go, O fairest of women?
                       Whither did thy dear brother bend his course ; that we may
                       seek him with thee ? "
                  2           My dear brother went down to his garden to the beds of
                  o spices ; to feed in the garden and to gather lillies.                                                        I am my dear
                      brother's and he is mine ; he is feeding among the lillies
                  4           Thou my consort, art beautiful as Terzah ; comely as Jeru-
                  5 salem ;             dazzling as embattled hosts !                                       Turn thine eyes aside
                      from me for they have transported me.                                                 Thy hair is like a flock
                  6 of goats which are seen on mount Galaad : thy teeth like
                      flocks of shorn sheep, just come up from washing : all twins
                      and there is not one defective among them : thy lips are like a
                  7 braid of scarlet, and thy speech is graceful.                                                      Thy cheek is like
                      the downy skin of a pomegranate now thy veil is removed.
                  8 There are sixty queens and eighty concubines, and virgins
                  9 without number : one is my dove, my consecrated one.                                                                      One is
                      her mother's only child—the darling of her who bore her.
                      Daughters viewed her—nay queens and even concubines will
               10 hail her happy and thus extoll her.                                                 "Who is she that is look-
                      ing out like the morning ; fair as the moon, distinguishable as
                      the sun, and dazzling as embattled hosts."
                      VI.         11        I WENT down to the garden of nuts to look at the
                      productions of the valley : to seek whether the vine had bud-
                                                              —                                                                          !                                               ;
                                                                      SOLOMON'S SONG.
           Ch. VII. VIII.
           12 ded or the pomegranate blossomed : I am there to grant thee
                    my breasts.                        My soul did not recollect this.                                                        It made me like
                    the chariots of Aminadab.
           13                Eeturn, return,                                     Sunamite ! return, return that we may
                    see thee !
                             What would you see in the Sunamite, who is coming like
                    the moving bands of an army ?
           VII.                    How beautiful were thy steps in thy sandals,                                                                                          daugh-
                    ter of Nadab ?                            The infoldings of thy loins are like jewellery, the
              2 work of an artist : thy clasp is a well turned goblet, not desti-
                    tute of mingled wine : thy body is like a heap of wheat enconi-
              3 passed about with lillies : thy two breasts are like two twin
              4 fawns of a roe ; thy neck is like a tower of ivory.                                                                                           Thine eyes
                    like the pools at Esebon by the gates of the daughter of many :
                    thy nose is like the tower of Lebanon which looketh towards
              5 Damascus : thy head is like Carmel and the tresses of thy head
                    like Purpura.
                             The king is detained in the antichamber
              6             How beautiful thou art ! and how sweet !                                                                                 my love ! how
              7 delightful !                          In respect to thy stateliness, thou hast been com-
                    pared to the palm tree, and thy breasts to its clusters.                                                                                              I said,
              8 I will climb the palm tree—I will clasp its topmost boughs ;
                    and thy breasts shall be now like the clusters of the vine ; and
                    the smell of thy nose like citrons ; and the roof of thy mouth
                    like choice wine
              9              Which is poured out rightly for my dear brother properly
           10 adapted with my lips and my teeth.                                                                         I am my dear brother's
           11 and towards me is his desire.                                                              Come, my dear brother, let us
           12 go out to the fields.                                         Let us lodge in the villages : let us get up
                    early to the vineyards : let us see whether the vine is budded :
                    whether the young grape has made its appearance : whether the
                   pomegranates are in blossom.                                                            There I will grant thee my
           13 breasts.                       The mandrakes have shed a fragrance : and in our
                   hoards are all manner of delicious fruits, newly gathered as
                    well as old.                       For thee, my dear brother I have kept them.
          VIII.                      that thou, my dear brother, hadst sucked the breasts of
                   my mother ; meeting thee abroad I could kiss thee and not be
             2 despised ; I could take thee and conduct thee to my mother's
                   house : and to the inmost apartment of her who conceived me,
                            VOL. II.                                                         x x
                                                            ——
                   VIII.                        SOLOMON'S SONG.
            Ch.
                 I could cause thee to driuk spiced wiue of the juice of my po-
             3 megranates ; his left haud might be under my head and his
                 right embrace me.
              4        I have charged you, O daughters of Jerusalem, by the pow-
                 ers and virtues of the field ; that you stir not up nor awake my
                 love till she please.
            VII.        5      WHO is this coming up cloathed in white leaning on
                 her beloved ?
                      Under a citron tree I awaked thee.                       It was there thy mother
                 bare thee.        There she who brought thee forth suffered the pangs
                 of childbirth.
             6            set me as a seal on thy heart—as a seal on thine arm : for
                 love is strong as death               jealousy inflexible as Hades : its wings
                                                     ;
                 are wings of fire its flames
             7        Much water cannot quench love ; nor can floods drown it.
                 Though a man give all his substance for love, he may be tho-
                 roughly despised.
             8        Our sister is little and hath no breasts.                           What can we do
                 for our sister on the day when she shall be demanded in mar-
              9 riage.        If she be a wall we will build on her silver turrets, and if
                 she be a door we will line her with boards of cedar.
            10        I am a wall and my breasts are turrets.                          I was in their view
            11 as one who had found favour.                       Solomon had a vineyard at Bee-
                 lamon, he let this vineyard of his to tenants, a man is to give
            12 him a thousand pieces of silver for its fruit.                          Myvineyard which
                 is before me shall continue to be mine.                         Solomon shall have the
                 thousand pieces of silver, and they who take care of its fruits,
                 two hundred.
            13         Thou who art sitting in the gardens, companions are wait-
            14 ing thy voice.             Let me hear it
            15         Away, my dear brother, and be like a roe ; or a young hart
                  on the mountains of spices.
                                                                                                                         ;
              I.                                        ESAIAS.
      Ch.
      I.     I.     A vision which Esaias son of Amos saw, (ivhich he saw
            respecting Judea and Jerusalem) in the reign of Ozias, and Joa-
            tham and Achaz and Hezehias, tvho reigned over Judea.
        2         HEARKEN,                    heaven ! and hear                    earth ! what the Lord
            hath spoken.
                  " I     have begotten children and brought them up ; and
        3 they have rebelled against me.                                The ox knoweth his owner,
            and the ass his master's crib ; but Israel did not know me.
            And this people have not regarded me."
        4         Ah ! sinful nation—people full of sins ! vile race ! iniquitous
            children ! you have utterly forsaken the Lord ; and provoked to
        5 wrath the Holy One of Israel.                         What ! must you persisting in ini-
        6 quity be smitten still more ?                           The whole head is sick, and the
            whole heart faint : from the feet to the head, there is no soundness
            therein.        Is it not, here a wound, there a bruise, there a putrefying
        7 sore ? there is no applying poultice, nor oil, nor bandages. Your
            land is a desert : your cities are burnt with fire.                             As for your coun-
            try, before your eyes strangers are devouring it ; and it is laid
        8 waste, being subdued by foreign tribes.                                       Must the daughter
            of Sion be left as a shed in a vineyard : and as a lodge in a gar-
        9 den of cucumbers—as a city taken by siege ?                                       Had not the Lord
            of Hosts left us a seed, we should have been as Sodom and
      10 made like Gomorra.                         Hear a word of the Lord,                               chiefs of
            Sodom !          Attend to the law of God, ye people of Gomorra !
                  " What is the multitude of your sacrifices to me ? saith the
       11 Lord : I am cloyed with whole burnt offerings of rams : in the
            fat of lambs and the blood of bulls and goats I have no delight
       12 nor should you come to appear before me: for who hath re-
             quired these at your hands ?                        You shall no more be admitted to
       13 tread my court.                  Though you bring fine flour; it is a vain in-
             cense—it is an abomination to me.                                    Your new moons and
             sabbaths and great day I cannot endure : your fasting and cessa-
             tion from labour ; and your new moons and your festivals my
       14 soul hateth.              You are become loathsome to me ; I will no longer
       15 remit your sins.                   W^hen you stretch forth your hands, I will
             turn mine eyes from you : and though you multiply prayer,
             I will not hearken to you : for your hands are full of blood.
       16 Wash and become clean: remove iniquities from your souls;
             in my presence, cease from your evil deeds ; learn to do good ;
                                                                                                           ;;
            Ch. II.                                 ESAIAS.
            17 seek judgment ; deliver him who is injured ; administer jus-
                 tice to the orphan, and plead the cause of the widow : then
            18 come—(let our controversy be brought to issue, saith the Lord)
                 and though your sins be as a purple stain ; I will make you
                 white as snow—though they be as a stain of scarlet ; I will make
            19 you white as wool.             If you indeed be willing and will hearken
            20 to me, you shall eat the good things of the land : but if you re-
                 fuse and hearken not to me, the sword shall devour you; for
                 the mouth of the Lord hath spoken these words."
            21        How is the faithful city become a harlot ?                   Sion that was full
                 of justice !     In it righteousness made its abode ; but now murder-
            22 ers.      Your silver is not pure : thy vintners mix the wine with
            23 water.       The chiefs are rebellious ; associates of thieves : they
                 love gifts ; they seek rewards : to orphans they do not administer
            24 justice ; and to the cause of widows they do not attend.                            There-
                 fore thus saith the sovereign Lord of hosts.
                      " Alas for the rulers of Israel ! for my wrath against these
                 adversaries shall not abate.               On these enemies of mine I will
            25 execute judgment : and I will bring my hand over thee, and
                 purify thee with fire.          Them who are disobedient I will destroy
            26 and I will take away from thee all transgressors, and establish
                 thy judges as at the first : and thy counsellors as at the begin-
                ning : and after these things thou shalt be called The city of
            27 Righteousness, the faithful metropolis, Sion.                      For in the exer-
            28 cise of judgment her captivity shall be saved : and in the exer-
                 cise of mercy, the lawless and sinful shall be crushed together
                and they who have forsaken the Lord shall be utterly destroyed :
            29 for they shall be exposed to shame for the idols on which they
                 doted ; as they have been for the gardens which they desired.
           30 For they shall be like an ilex, which hath shed its leaves ; and like
           31 a garden which hath no water : and their strength shall be like
                tow ; and their works like sparks of fire : and the lawless and sin-
                ful shall be burned up together ; and there shall be no extin-
                 guisher."
             II.    II.     The word which came to Esaias, son of Amos concern-
                                 ing Jitdea and concerning Jerusalem.
             2       BECAUSE in the last days, the mount of the Lord will
                be conspicuous ; and the house of God will be on the top
         4
        Ch. II.                                       ESAIAS.
              of mountains ; and exalted above the hills : therefore all the
          3 nations will come to it.                 Many nations indeed, will go saying,
                   " Come, let us go up to the mount of the Lord                                       and to
                                                                                                     ;
              the house of the God of Jacob.                      And he will teach us his way,
              and we will walk therein."
                   For from Sion shall go forth a law ; and the word of the
          4 Lord from Jerusalem.                    And he will judge among the nations ;
             and work conviction in many a people : and they shall beat
             their swords into plough shares ; and their spears into prun-
              ing hooks : and nation shall not lift up a sword against nation ;
             nor shall they learn war any more.
          5        Now therefore, O house of Jacob ; come, let us walk in
             the light of the Lord.                  For he hath forgiven his people, the
             house of Israel.
                   (J) " Because their land was rilled as at first with divina-
             tions ; like that of the Philistines and many strange children
         7 were born to them—for their country was filled with silver
             and gold, and there was no counting their treasures ; and their
             land was filled with horses, and there was no end to their cha-
         8 riots ; and the land was filled with abominations, the work-
             manship of their own hands ; and they worshipped the things
         9 which their fingers had made, and the commoner bowed down
             and the noble humbled himself; therefore I will not forgive
             them."—
       10         "Now therefore go into the rocks and hide yourselves in
             the earth, from the tremendous presence of the Lord ; and from
             the glory of his majesty, when he shall arise, to crush the land."
        11         "For the eyes of the Lord are lofty ; but man is low; and
             the loftiness of these men shall be humbled ; and the Lord
       12 alone shall be exalted in that day.                         For the day of the Lord of
             hosts is against every scorner and haughty man ; and against
       13 every one high and lofty, and they shall be humbled : even
             against every of those high towering cedars of Lebanon ; and
       1     against every oak of Basan ; and against every lofty mountain ;
       15 and against every hill that is high ; and against every stately
       16 tower ; and against every high raised wall ; and against every
            ship of the sea ; and against every ensign of beauteous ships :
                                                  (J) Jehovah.
            Ch. III.                                     ESAIAS.
            17 and every man shall be humbled ; and the haughtiness of
                 these men shall fall ; and the Lord alone shall be exalted in
           18 that day.            Then will they hide all these handiworks, carrying
           19 them into caverns and clefts of the rocks, and into the caves
                 of the earth, from the tremendous presence of the Lord, and
                 from the glory of his majesty, when he shall arise to crush
           20 the lands.            For on that day men will cast to the bats their abo-
                 minations both of silver and gold, which they made to worship
           21 vanities ; that they may go into holes of the flinty rock—nay
                 into the very clefts of the rock, from the tremendous pre-
                 sence of the Lord, and from the glory of his majesty, when
                 he shall arise to crush the land.
           III.         Behold now the Sovereign Lord of hosts will remove,
                 from Jerusalem and from Judea, all stay and support of every
             2 kind—the stay of bread and the stay of water ; the giant and
                 mighty man and warrior ; judge and prophet ; instructor and
             3 elder ;       the captain of fifty, and honourable counsellor ; the
             4 skilful architect and intelligent scholar : and I will make boys
             5 their princes ; and scorners shall rule over them.                                   And upon
                 one another the people will fall foul, and justle every man
                 against his neighbour—the boy against the elder and the base
                 against the honourable.
              6       Because a man will take hold of his brother, or the head
                 of the house of his father, saying, Thou hast clothing be thou
                 our leader, and let me be supplied with food under thee."
              7 " Therefore on that day he will answer and say, I will not be
                 thy leader, for in my house there is neither bread nor raiment,
                 I will not be the leader of this people."
              8        Because Jerusalem is forsaken and Judea is fallen there-
                 fore their tongues concur with their transgression.                                  They dis-
                 believe the things relating to the Lord.                          Because their glory is
              9 now humbled ; and the shame of their countenance is risen up
                 against them : their sin therefore, like the Sodomites, they
                  proclaimed and openly avowed.                       Alas for their souls ! because
                  they have counselled an evil counsel against themselves, say-
                  ing, " Let us bind the just one, for he is disagreeable to us "
            10                                                                                                    ;
            11 let them therefore eat the fruits of their deeds.                                  Alas for the
                  wicked ! according to the works of his hands evils shall befal
                                  "                                                                                      ;
       Ch. IV.                                           ESAIAS.
       12 hira.             my people ! your task masters glean you ; and exactors
             tyrannize over you. O my people ! They who call you happy lead
       13 youastray; and disturbthe path of your feet. But the Lordwill now
       14 arise to plead his cause ; and he will arraign his people. The Lord
             will himself come to a trial with the elders of the people and
             with their chiefs : " Why have you burned up my vineyard ?
       15 And why is the plunder of the poor in your houses ?                                               Why do
             you injure my people ; and cover with shame the face of the
             poor.
       16          Thus saith the Lord, Because the daughters of Sion are
             haughty and have walked with outstretched neck and wanton
             eyes, trailing with them in their gait flowing robes, and mov-
       17 ing in set pace with their feet ; therefore God will humble the
            princely daughters of Sion and the Lord will expose their form
       18 to view.            On that daythe Lord will take away the finery of their
       19 attire, the cauls and the curls and the crescents, the solitaire
             and the ornament of the brow, and the gorgeous wreathed tiar,
            and the necklaces and the bracelets, and the zone and the
            rings for the fingers, and the ornaments for the right arms,
            and the ear-rings and the robes with purple borders, and those
            the middle of which is purple, and the dresses worn at home,
            and the Laconian gauzes and cotton robes, and those of purple
            and scarlet and cotton, embroidered with gold and purple ; and
       24 the summer sophas : and instead of perfumes there shall be
            ashes ; and instead of a girdle thou shalt be girded with rushes
            and instead of a golden head-dress thou shalt have baldness,
            on the account of thy doings ; and instead of the purple robe
       25 thou shalt gird on sackcloth.                           And thy son the most beautiful
            whom thou lovest shall fall by the sword ; and your mighty
       26 men shall fall by the sword and be laid low; and your ward-
            robes shall mourn ; and thou shalt be left solitary and shalt sit
      IV.           on the ground; and seven women shall lay hold on one
            man, saying, " We will eat our own bread and wear our own
            raiment, let us only be called by thy name: take thou away
            our reproach.
        2         "But in that day God will with glorious counsel shine on
        3 the land, to exalt and dignify the remnant of Israel.                                               And it
            shall come to pass that what is left in Sion, and what is left in
            Jerusalem shall be called Holy.                             Namely all who are enrolled
                                                                                                                            —
              Ch. V.                                           ESAIAS.
                4 for life in Jerusalem.                     Because the Lord will wash away the
                    filth of the sons and the daughters of Sion, and cleanse the
                   blood entirely from among them ; by a spirit of judgment and
               5 a spirit of burning ; therefore when he shall come, every part
                   of Sion and all around it shall be overshadowed by day with
                   a cloud as of smoke, and by night with that of the light of
                6 blazing fire ; and with all this glory it shall be covered ; and
                   this will be a shade from heat, and it shall be in a shelter and
                   covert from storm and rain."
              Y.     III.       Let me sing for the Beloved, a song of my Beloved to Ids
                                                                vineyard.
                         THE beloved had a vineyard on a mountain in a rich soil,
               2 " and I hedged it around and trenched it                                      and planted it with
                                                                                            ;
                   the vine of Sorek; and in the midst of it built a tower, and
                   hewed out therein a wine lake ; and waited for its producing
                   grapes, and it produced poisonous berries.
                3        "Now therefore,                      inhabitants of Jerusalem and men of
               4 Juda, judge between me and my vineyard.                                          What more could
                    I do for my vineyard that I have not done for it ?                                         Because I
                   expected that it would produce grapes, and it hath produced
                5 poisonous berries; now therefore I will tell you, what I pur-
                    pose to do with my vineyard ; I take away the hedge there-
                    of, and it shall be exposed to plunder ; and I will demolish its
                6 wall, and it shall be for a common walk ; and I will abandon
                    my vineyard that it may neither be pruned nor digged; and
                    brambles shall overrun it as a waste ; and I will give a charge
                7 to the clouds not to shed rain upon it.                               For the vineyard of the
                    Lord of Hosts is the house of Israel ; and the men of Juda his
                    beloved plant.              I waited for their executing justice, but they
                    committed injustice, and promoted not righteousness, but an
                    outcry.
                8         Woe unto them who join house to house, and who are
                    bringing field nearer to field, that they may take something
                9 from their neighbour.                    Are you alone to dwell in the land ?                           For
                    these things have come to the ears of the Lord of Hosts.                                              For
                    though there be many houses they shall be for desolation
                    though great and fair, there shall be no inhabitants therein.
              10 For the ground worked by ten yoke of oxen will not yield a
                    bath of wine ; and he who soweth six measures shall not raise
                    three.
     Ch. V.                           ESAIAS.
     11     Woe to them, who rise early to follow strong drink, and
         continue at it till late at night ; for the wine will inflame them.
     12 For with kithara and psaltery, tabors and pipes, they drink
        wine ; but they regard not the works of the Lord, nor consider
     13 the operations of his hands.        Therefore my people are become
         captives, because they did not know the Lord ; and multitudes
     14 have died of famine and thirst ; and Hades hath enlarged its
         appetite, and opened its mouth, that there may be no want of
         room ; and down shall go the honourable and the great, and
     15 the rich and the pestilent men of the land. The commoner shall
         be humbled ; and the noble dishonoured ; and the lofty eyes
     1(3 shall be brought down ; and the Lord of Hosts shall be exalted
         in judgment ; and God, the Holy One, shall be glorified by righ-
     17 teousness ; and they who have been plundered shall be fed like
         bulls, and lambs shall graze the waste places of them who have
         been removed.
     18     Woe unto them who draw out sins as for a long cable : and
     19 iniquities as for an ox chain : who say, " Let what he is to do
         approach speedily that we may see ; and let the counsel of the
         Holy One of Israel come that we may know it."
     20      Woe to them who call evil good; and good evil—who put
         darkness for light, and light for darkness ; who put bitter for
         sweet ; and sweet for bitter.
     21      Woe to them who are wise in their own conceit, and in
         their own eyes prudent.
     22      Woe to your mighty men who drink wine ; and to your prin-
     23 ces who mingle strong drink : who justify the wicked for re-
     24 wards; and deprive the just of his right.           For this cause, as
         stubble will be set on fire by a coal, and consumed by a ne-
         glected flame ; their root shall be like touch wood, and their
         blossom shall ascend like dust : for they desired not the law of
         the Lord of Hosts : but provoked to wrath the manifestion of
     25 the Holy One of Israel.        Wherefore the Lord of Hosts was in-
         censed against his people, and he stretched out his hand against
         them and smote them : and the mountains were convulsed, and
         their carcasses were as dung in the high way : and for all this
         his anger was not turned away ; but still his hand is high.
     26 Therefore he will erect a standard among the nations far off,
         and summon them from the extremity of the earth ; and be-
            VOL. II.                      Y y
            VI.                      ESAIAS.
        Ck
        27 hold ! with speed they are coming swiftly.   They will not hun-
            ger, nor will they be weary : they will not slumber, nor lie
            down to sleep ; nor shall their girdles be loosed from their
        28 loins, nor the latchets of their sandals broken.    Their arrows
            are sharp ; and their bows are bent : the hoofs of their horses
            have been accounted as flint, and the wheels of their chariots
        29 are like a whirlwind.   They growl like lions, and are at hand
            like young lions.  He will seize and roar like a wild beast and
            drive out the people, and there shall be none to deliver them.
        30     On that day he will roar against them like the roaring of the
            billowy sea ; and they will look upwards to the heaven and down
            on the earth ; and lo ! distressful darkness in their tribulation.
                                 A solemn Vision.
        VI.   IV.   IN the year in which Ozias the king died I saw the
           Lord seated on a high and lofty throne ; and the house was filled
         2 with his glory.  And seraphs stood around him, each having six
           wings ; and with two they covered the face, and with two they
         3 covered the feet, and two they used in flying.   And they cried
           one to another and said,
               " Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of Hosts ; the whole earth is
            filled with his glory."
         4     And the lintel of the door was shaken with the sound of their
         5 cry, and the house was filled with smoke.    Whereupon I said,
            Ah! woe is me ! (for I was confounded) for being a man, and
           having unclean lips ; and dwelling among a people of unclean
         6 lips, I have seen with mine eyes the king the Lord of Hosts.
            Then one of the seraphs was sent to me and he had in his hand
         7 a live coal which he had taken from the altar with the tongs.
            And having touched my lips he said, Behold this hath touch-
         8 ed thy lips, and it will take away thine iniquities and purge away
            thy sins.  Then I heard the voice of the Lord, saying, Whom
         9 shall I send ? And who will go to this people ? And I said, Be-
            hold, here am I : send me.  And he said,
               Go and say to this people ; hearing you shall hear, though
            you may not understand : and seeing you shall see, though you
        10 may not perceive : for the heart of this people is stupefied ; and
            their ears are dull of hearing ; and they have shut their eyes,
            that for a while they may not see with their eyes ; and hear with
                                                              ESAIAS.
       Ch. VII.
                                                                 with their hearts                   and return that I
              their ears ; and understand                                                          ;
             may heal them.
       11           Whereupon I said, For how long ?                                      Lord !          And he said,
                    Until cities be wasted so as not to be habitable ; and houses,
              so that there be no men ; and the land be left utterly desolate :
       12 And after this God will remove the men far away.
                    They indeed who are left in the land shall be multiplied ;
       13 for still about the tenth is in it ; and shall again be for a prey,
              and be like the ilex and like the oak when it hath fallen from its
              station.
        VII.        V.      IN the days of Achaz the son of Joatham, the son of
              Ozias king of Judah, Easin king of Aram and Phakee son of
              Eomelias king of Israel came up against Jerusalem to war
          2 against it, but could not lay close siege to it.                                           When the house
              of     David was informed that Aram had confederated with
              Ephraim, the heart of the king and the heart of his people was
          3 moved, as a tree in the forest is shaken by the wind.                                                   Whereup-
              on the Lord said to Esaias, Go out and meet Achaz, thou and
          4 FoTsahen-jasttb thy son, at the pool on the upper road to the
              fuller's field, and thou shalt say to him,
                     Take heed and be quiet ; be not terrified, nor let thy soul
              be dismayed on the account of these two smoaking firebrands :
              for when my fierce wrath is come I will again heal.
          5          And as for the son of Aram and the son of Eomelias ; be-
          6 cause they have taken evil counsel, saying, Let us go up to
               Judea and confer with the people and bring them into our
          7 measures                and let us make the son of Tabeel king over it, thus
                                ;
               saith the Lord of hosts.                       This counsel shall not stand ; nor shall
          8 it take effect.               But the head of Aram shall be Damascus, and the
              head of Damascus, Easin—but further, in three score and five
              years, the kingdom of Ephraim shall cease from being a people,
          9 though Somoron is the head of Ephraim, and the son of Eome-
              lias, the head of Somoron, yes though you may not believe
               nor understand.
        10           Moreover the Lord proceeded to speak to Achaz saying,
        11 "Ask thee a sign from the Lord thy God in the depth or in
        12 the height. "                   And Achaz said, " I will not ask, nor will I try
        13 the Lord."                  Thereupon he said, Hear now,                                      house of David,
        Ch. VIII.                     ESAIAS.
           Is it a small matter for you to contend with men ?      How is it
           then that you contend with the Lord?     Therefore the Lord him-
           self will give you a sign.
        14     Behold the virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and he
           shall be called Emmanuel.
        15     Both this child,* before it hath known to chuse good in pre-
        16 ference to evil, eat butter and honey, because previous to its
           knowing good or evil it disobeyeth evil to make choice of
           good?    The land indeed which thou fearest on account of these
        17 two kings shall be relinquished ; but God will bring upon thee
           and upon thy people and upon the house of thy father days
           which have not yet come.    From the day he hath taken Ephra-
        18 im from Juda [he will bring] the king of the Assyrians.         It
           shall come to pass that at that time the Lord will utter a call
           to the flies—to that part of them which rule over the river of
           Egypt ; and to the bee which is in the country of the Assyri-
        19 ans ; and they shall all come into the vallies of this country ; and
           into the holes of the rocks ; and into the caves and into every
        20 cleft.  On that day the Lord will shave with that razor—with
           that which was hired on the bank of the river—with that of the
            king of the Assyrians, the head and the hair of the feet : and
        21 take off the beard. And it shall come to pass in that day, that a
        22 man will keep a young cow and two sheep ; and by reason of
           the abundance he will drink milk—butter and honey will be
        23 eaten by every one left in the land.    And it shall come to pass
           in that day every where, though there may be a thousand vine-
            yards, each valued at a thousand shekels income : they shall be
        24 for briars and thorns.    With bows and arrows men will resort
            thither.  Because the whole country shall be a waste of briars
        25 and thorns, therefore every mountain which hath been plough-
           ed will be ploughed, wherever terror could not come ; for by
            reason of the country's being a waste of briars and thorns, it
            shall be a pasture for sheep and a range for the ox.
        VIII.     Again the Lord said to me, Take thee a strip of a large
            new roll and write thereon with a man's pen " Speed cjidckly to
         2 the plunder of the spoil," for it is at hand.And let faithful men,
            Ourias and Zacharias son of Barachias be witnesses for me.
          3    Now I had approached to the prophetess and she had con-
                             * Pointing to his son Jasub.
     Ch. VIII.                 ESAIAS.
        ceived and when she brought forth a son, the Lord said to me,
      4 Call his name ''Speed to the spoil—haste to the prey" for be-
        fore this child shall know to pronounce father or mother, the
        van of the king of Assyria will take the army of Damascus and
        the spoils of Samaria.
     5     Again the Lord spoke yet further to me saying, Because
      6 this people reject the water of Siloam which floweth gently and
        chuse to have Kasin and the son of Komelias to rule over them ;
      7 therefore behold the Lord will bring upon you the water of the
        river which is strong and abundant— even the king of Assyria
        and his glory ; and he will rise over all your channels, and over-
      8 flow all your banks ; and sweep away from Judea every man
        who can raise his head, or is capable of executing any thing.
        And the circuit of his camp shall be such as to fill the breadth
      9 of thy country,   Emmanuel.   Know this,    nations, and be
        struck with consternation.Hearken ye who are in the remot-
        est parts of the earth ; be struck with consternation ye who have
        made yourselves strong ; for though you should again become
     10 strong ; with consternation you shall again be stricken, and what
        counsel soever you may take, the Lord will defeat it ; and what
        word soever you may speak shall not take effect among you ;
     11 because God is with us :
           Thus saith the Lord with the strong hand, to them who
        refuse to walk in the way of this people saying, Perhaps they
     12 may order what is hard—(for whatever this people order is
        hard.)
           Be not ye terrified with the fear of them, nor dismayed ; hal-
     13 low the Lord himself, and let him be thy fear: for if thou hast put
     14 trust in him he will be to thee a sanctuary, and you shall not run
        against a stumbling stone, nor as under a falling rock.But as
        for the houses of Jacob, they are in a trap, and the inhabitants
     15 of Jerusalem are in a pit : for this cause many among them shall
        be weak and fall and be trodden down and men will safely ap-
     16 proach and take them.   Then shall they be manifest who seal
     17 up the law that it may not be learned. Then will one say, " I
        will wait for God, who hath turned away his face from the
        house of Jacob ; and I will trust in him.Here am I and the
        children whom God hath given me."
     18     Now when there shall be signs and wonders in the house
        of  Israel from the Lord of hosts, who dwelleth on Mount
                                                                                                                                         ;;:
                    IX.                                            ESAIAS.
            Ch.
             19 Sion ; if they should say to you, " Apply to the belly speakers,
                   and to them who cause a voice to proceed from the ground."
                   Those vain babblers who speak from the belly : should not
                   a nation apply to their God ?                             Why consult they the dead con-
            20 cerning the living ?                           For he hath given a law for assistance
                   that they may not speak like such an oracle as this, which is
            21 not worth the giving of gifts for it.                                         Upon you indeed there
                   shall come a grievous famine ; and it shall come to pass that
                   when you are hungry, you will fret and curse the ruler and
            22 the customs of your country.                                     And they will look up to the
                   heaven above, then down on the earth beneath, and lo distress
                   and darkness ! tribulation and anguish and a gloom so as not
            IX.            to see !          But he who is in distress for a season shall not
                   be abandoned to despair.                         Drink this first ; do it quickly. With
                   regard to the region of Zabulon, the land of Nephthaleim and
                   the rest who inhabit the sea shore, and the banks of the Jor-
              2 dan, Galilee of the nations ; ye people who walk in darkness,
                   behold ! a great light ! and ye who dwell in a region, the
                   shade of death, on you a light shall shine.
              3          With regard to the bulk of the people, whom thou hast
                   brought back in thy joy, they shall rejoice in thy presence,
                   like them who rejoice in the harvest, and like them who are di-
              4 viding spoils ; because the yoke which lay upon them, is taken
              5 away, and the rod which was over their neck.                                                      For he hath
                   broken the rod of the exactor, as in the day of Madiam : for,
                  with a renewal of friendship, they shall make compensation
                   for every robe collected by deceit, and for every garment
                   and shall be willing to do so, if they were burned with fire
               6 because for us a child is born, and to us a son is given, whose
                   government is on his own shoulder ; and his name is called,
                   " The Messenger of Great Counsel."                                       For I will bring peace
               7 on the rulers and health for him.                                        His government shall be
                   great and to his peace there is no boundary, on the throne
                   of David and over his kingdom, to re-establish it, and support
                   it with judgment and justice, henceforth and forever.                                                  The zeal
                   of the Lord of hosts will do this.
                   YI.       8 THE LOED hath sent death against Jacob ; and it hath
               9 come upon Israel.                       And all the people of Ephraim shall know
                   it, and all the inhabitants of Samaria, who with haughtiness
                          —                                                                                      ;
      Ch. X.                                      ESAIAS.
      10 and a lofty heart say, " The bricks are fallen ; but come, let
           us hew stones and let us cut down sycamines and cedars and
           build for ourselves a tower."
      11         Though God will dash down them, who rise up against
      12 him on mount Sion ; and disperse his enemies—Syria in the
            east, and the Greeks in the west, who are devouring Israel
            with open mouth ; for all this his anger is not turned away, but
            still his hand is lifted high.
      13         The people did not turn till they were smitten ; as they
       14 indeed did not seek the Lord ; therefore the Lord cut off from
       15 Israel, head and tail, great and little in one day—the aged and
            the honourable, this was the head ; and the prophet who teach-
       16 eth falsehood, he is the tail.                     Still there will be deceivers, who
            will call this people happy, and lead them astray, that they may
       17 devour them; therefore the Lord will have no pleasure in
            their young men ; and on their orphans and their widows he
            will have no compassion ; because they are all wicked and
            regardless of law, and every mouth speaketh perversely.                                         For
            all this his wrath is not turned away but still his hand is lift-
             ed high.
       18         Still iniquity will burn like a fire, and like dry stubble it
             shall be consumed by fire.                   It shall burn in the thickets of the
       19 forest, and consume all on the hills around.                                 By reason of the
             fierce anger of the Lord the whole country is in a flame ; and
             the people shall be as fuel for the fire.                           A man will have no
       20 pity for his brother, but will turn to the right because he is
             hungry, and devour on the left, but shall not be satisfied.                                   Man
             is   devouring the flesh of his brother's arm; for Manasses is
             devouring Ephraim, and Ephraim, Manasses ; for they will
             both together besiege Juda.
                   For all this his anger is not turned away ; but still his hand
             is lifted high.
        X.         Woe to them who write wickedness !                                   For writers are
          2 writing wickedness ; turning aside the cause of the distressed
              robbing the poor of my people, of their right ; that the widow
          3 may be their prey and the orphan, their spoil : what then shall
              they do in the day of visitation?                        For tribulation shall come
              upon you from afar ; and to whom can you flee for succour ?
                                                                            —;;
        Ch. X.                         ESAIAS.
         4 And where will you leave your glory, that you may not fall into
           the captive band ?
               For all this his anger is not turned away, but still his hand
           is lifted high.
         5     Ho ! Assyrians !
         6     The rod of my wrath, even mine anger is in their hands, I
           will send this anger of mine to a lawless nation ; and I will order
           this people of mine to gather spoil and take the prey, and to
         7 trample down cities and lay them in the dust.       But he did not
           harbour such thoughts ; nor did he reason thus in his mind
           but his mind will prompt him to destroy nations not a few.
         8 Even though they should say to him, Thou alone art chief.
         9 He indeed will say,
               " Have I not taken the whole country above Babylon and
           Chalene, where the tower had been builded ?        Nay have I not
        10 taken Arabia and Damascus and Samaria ?          In the same man-
           ner as I have taken these ; so will I take all the governments.
        11 Howl ye graven images in Jerusalem and in Samaria; for as I
           have done to Samaria and her images, so will I do to Jerusa-
           lem and her idols."
        12     But it shall come to pass, when the Lord hath accom-
           plished his whole work on mount Sion and Jerusalem ; that I
           will cast a look on the stout heart—on the chief ruler of the
           Assyrians, and on the loftiness of the glory of his eyes.
        13     For he said, " With this power I will perform exploits
           and by the wisdom of mine understanding I will remove the
        14 boundaries of nations, and make a prey of their strength, and
           shake   inhabited cities, and seize with my hand the whole
           world as a nest ; and carry off the inhabitants like deserted eggs.
           There is none who can escape me or chirp against me."
        15     Shall an axe boast without him who cutteth with it ; or a
           saw lift itself up, without him who draweth it ;      as one could
           lift up a staff or a piece of wood ?   No; this shall not be per-
        16 mitted : indeed the Lord of hosts will send disgrace on thy
        17 honour, and on thy glory a burning fire shall be kindled : and
           the light of Israel shall be for a fire, and shall hallow him with
           a burning fire, and consume his substance like dry grass.
        18 On that day there shall be an extinction of the mountains,
           and the hills, and the forests ; and it shall consume from the
                                                                       ——
     Ch. XL                       ESAIAS.
        soul even to the flesh : and he who fleeth shall be like one flee-
     19 ing from blazing fire.   And those of them who are left shall be
     20 few in number, so that a child may write them down.       And it
        shall come to pass in that day that the remnant of Israel shall
        no more join, nor shall those of Jacob who have escaped, any
        more lean on them who have injured them ; but they will place
     21 their confidence in God the Holy One of Israel, in truth.    This
     22 remnant of Jacob shall indeed be for the Mighty God.        Yes :
        though the people of Israel be as the sand of the sea, this rem-
        nant of them shall be saved. He is closing an account and rnak-
     23 ing a deduction with saving goodness.    Because with the whole
        land the Lord will make a reckoning from which a deduction
     24 hath been made, therefore thus saith the Lord of Hosts,
            " O my people who dwell in Sion, be not daunted at the
        Assyrian, because he will smite thee with a rod ; for I am
        bringing this stroke upon thee that thou mayst see the way of
     25 Egypt. For yet a little while and mine indignation shall cease ;
     26 and my wrath will be against their counsel ; and God will raise
        against them a scourge similar to that of Madiam at the place
        of affliction.
            When his wrath shall be in the western road—in the high
     27 way leading to Egypt ; it shall come to pass in that day, that
        his yoke shall be taken from thy shoulder, and the terror of him
        from thee—his yoke shall be utterly destroyed from off thy
     28 shoulders.   For he will come to the city Aggai, and pass on to
     29 Mageddo ; and at Machmas he will deposit his baggage : then
        he will pass the valley and come to Aggai.      Terror will seize
     30 Rama the city of Saul ; the daughter of Galleim will flee : he
         will be heard of at Laisa—he will be heard of at Anathoth.
     31 When Madebena hath fainted ; then,        inhabitants of Gibbeir,
     32 comfort with the news of his halting a day on his march
     33 with the hand comfort the mount, the daughter of Sion.       And
         as for you,    hills, which are in Jerusalem, behold the sove-
         reign Lord of hosts, with majesty confoundeth the glorious.
         They who are elated with arrogance shall be crushed ; and the
         lofty shall be brought low ; yes, the lofty shall fall by the sword ;
         and Libanus shall fall with the lofty.
     XL       And there shall spring up a shoot from the root of Jessai
       2 even from that root shall spring up a blooming shoot ; and the
            vol. ti.                 z z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ;;:
                           Ch. XL                                                                                                     ESAIAS.
                                        spirit of God will rest upon him—a spirit of wisdom and un-
                                        derstanding ; a spirit of counsel and majesty ; a spirit of know-
                               3 ledge and piety—by this spirit he will be filled with the fear
                                        of God.                             He will not judge according to opinion, nor will he
                               4 reprove according to report ; but he will administer justice to
                                        the lowly, and work conviction in the meek of the earth.                                                                                                                                                                       And
                                        he will smite the earth with the word of his mouth, and with
                                5 a breath from his lips destroy the wicked.                                                                                                                                        His loins will be
                           [
                                        girded with saving goodness, and his reins clothed with truth.
                                6 And a wolf shall pasture with a lamb ; and a leopard shall lie
                                        down with a kid ; and the calf, and bull and lion shall pasture
                                7 together, and a little child shall tend them.                                                                                                                                      The cow and bear
                                        shall feed together ; and together their young shall herd ; and
                                8 the lion shall eat chaff like an ox. And the sucking child shall
                                        lay its hand on the holes of asps and on the bed of young asps.
                                9 And they shall not hurt nor have power to destroy any one on
                                        the mountain which is my sanctuary.                                                                                                                 Because the whole earth
                                         is filled with the knowledge of the Lord as abundant water
                            10 covereth depths of seas ; therefore there shall be in that day,
                                        the root of Jesse, even he who riseth up to rule nations : in him
                                         nations will put their trust, and his resting place shall be glo-
                            11 rious.                                And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord will
                                         proceed to shew his hand to provoke to jealousy the remnant
                                         of his people—that residue which is left from the Assyrians,
                                        and from Egypt and from Babylonia, and from Ethiopia and
                            12 the Elamites, and from the risings of the sun and Arabia.                                                                                                                                                                               And
                                         he will erect a standard for the nations, and gather together the
                                         outcasts of Israel, and assemble the dispersed of Juda from the
                            13 four quarters of the earth.                                                                                         And the envy of Ephraim shall be
                                         taken away ; and the enemies of Juda shall be destroyed :
                                         Ephraim shall not envy Juda ; nor shall Juda vex Ephraim
                             14 And they shall be wafted in the ships of foreign tribes; and
                                         they shall spoil both the sea and them of the east and Idumea
                                         and upon Moab they shall first lay their hands ; but the sons of
                             15 Ammon shall first obey.                                                                                       And the Lord will dry up the sea of
                                         Egypt, and lay his hand on the river with a vehement wind
                                          and smite the seven channels, so that they may be crossed dry-
                             16 shod. And there shall be a passage for my people left in Egypt.
                                          It shall be for Israel as on the day when they came up out of
                                          the land of Egypt.
                                                                                                                ;;:
       Ch. XII. XIII.                                ESAIAS.
       XII.           And on that day thou wilt say, I bless thee,                                      Lord
             because, though thou wast angry with me, thou hast turned
         2 away thy wrath and pitied me. Behold ! my God is my Saviour,
             I will trust in him and not be afraid.                        Because the Lord is my
             glory and my praise ; and hath become unto me salvation
             therefore draw ye water with gladness from the wells of thanks-
             giving.
         3        Thou shalt say also on that day,                         praise the Lord : invoke
         4 his name aloud ! proclaim among the nations his glorious acts
             call them up to your remembrance.                            Because his name is ex-
         5 alted ; praise ye the name of the Lord.                            Because he hath done
             stupendous acts ; proclaim them throughout the whole earth.
         6 Shout for joy and be glad,                           inhabitants of Sion, for in the
             midst of it is exalted the Holy One of Israel.
       XIII.          VII.        A vision which Esaias son of Amos saw respecting
                                                      Babylon.
         2       (J) ON a mount in the plain, erect a standard ; raise the voice
         3 to them ; beckon with the hand.                           Open         princes ! it is I who
             command. It is I, who am leading these on.                              Giants are coming
             to execute my wrath, rejoicing and at the same time arrogant.
         4       (p) A sound of many nations on the mountains !                                         A tu-
             multuous sound of many nations.                           A sound of kings and na-
             tions gathered together ! the Lord of hosts hath issued or-
         5 ders to a nation trained for battle.                          They are come from a far
             distant country—from the extreme butment of heaven—the
             Lord and his trained warriors, to destroy all that inhabited
             land.
          6        Kaise the mournful cry ! for the day of the Lord is at hand,
          7 and destruction from God will come : therefore every hand
              shall be enfeebled ; and every man's heart shall be dismayed.
          8 The men in power shall be confounded ; and pangs shall seize
              them, like those of a woman in travail.                              And they shall be-
              wail their calamities, one to another, and be amazed ; and their
          9 countenances will quiver like a flame.                           For behold the remedi-
              less day of the Lord is coming—a day of wrath and indigna-
                                         (J) Jehovah, (p) the prophet.
            Ch. XIV.                                     ESAIAS.
                 tion, to make the empire a desolation ; and to destroy the sin-
            10 ners out of it.              For the stars of heaven—even Orion and the
                 whole host of heaven, shall not give light ; even that of the
                 rising sun shall be darkened; and the moon shall not give
                 her light.
            11         (J) I will indeed order evils for the whole empire, and on
                 the wicked their transgressions; and destroy the arrogance of
            12 the wicked ; and humble the haughtiness of the proud ; so
                 that those left shall be more precious than tried gold and a man
            13 more precious than the ore of Souphir.                           For the heaven shall be
                 filled with wrath ; and the earth shaken from its foundations ; at
            14 the fierce anger of the Lord of Hosts, on the day when his wrath
                 shall come : and those left shall be like a chased roe and wander-
                 ing sheep ; and there shall be none to collect them together ; so
                 that they may return every man to his place, when every one
            15 shall be seeking his own country.                            For whoever is evertaken
                 shall be thrust through and those collected in a body shall fall by
            16 the sword.           And their infants shall be dashed to pieces before
                 their eyes ; and their houses shall be plundered and their wives
            17 ravished.          Behold I am raising up against you the Medes, who
            18 disregard silver and have no need of gold. They shall break the
                 bows of the young men, and on your infants they will have no
            19 compassion ; nor will their eyes spare thee for thy children. And
                 Babylon, which is stiled Glorious, by the king of the Chal-
                 deans, shall be as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorra.
            20 It shall not be inhabited for a great length of time, nor shall it
                 be entered for many generations.                        The Arabians shall not pass
            21 through it ; nor shall shepherds make their folds therein.                                      But
                 wild beasts shall there go to rest ; and the houses shall be fill-
                 ed with howling.               There jackals shall make their abode ; and
            22 there demons shall hold their revels.                              And onocentaurs shall
                 inhabit there ; and porcupines shall breed in the houses.
            XIV.           (p) He is coming quickly and will not tarry, but the
                 Lord will have mercy on Jacob, and will still make choice of
                 Israel ; and they shall rest in their own land ; and the stranger
                 shall be joined to them, and shall be added to the house of Ja-
             2 cob. The nations shall take them and bring them to their place
                                                                                                                    ;
                 and the house of Jacob shall possess them ; when they shall be
                 multiplied in their land, for men servants and for maid servants :
                                                                                                                :                              —
       Ch. XIV.                                                     ESAIAS.
              and they who captivated them shall be captives ; and they who
          3 domineered over them shall be brought into subjection.                                                                         And
               it shall come to pass in that day when the Lord shall give thee
              rest from thy sorrow and thy grief—from that hard servitude
          4 of thine, with which thou hast served them, that thou wilt take
               up this funeral song over the king of Babylon
                      (c) " How the extortioner is laid to rest ! and a stop put to
          5 his demands ! The Lord hath broken the yoke of the sinners
          6 the yoke of the rulers.                               He smote a nation in wrath with an in-
               curable wound ; he smote a nation with a vengeful wound
          7 which did not spare.                             The confidant is gone to rest ; the whole
          8 earth shouteth for joy ; and the trees of Lebanon rejoice over
               thee—and the cedars of Lebanon say,
                      " Since thou hast gone to rest, no feller is come up against
          9 us."           Hades from beneath was in uproar to meet thee ; for thee
               were roused all the giants who had ruled the earth.                                                                   Having
               roused from their thrones all the kings of nations, they will all
              accost thee saying,
        10            " And art thou caught as we have been ?                                                         And among us
               art thou enrolled ?                        Is thy pomp come down to Hades—all thy
        11 great festivity?" Beneath thee they will strew corruption for a
        12 bed ; and worms shall be thy covering.                                                      How is Lucifer fallen
               from heaven !                    He who was harbinger of the morning—he who
               sent messages to all the nations, is trampled down into the earth.
        13 Thou indeed didst say in thy heart, I will ascend up into hea-
               ven ; above the stars of heaven I will place my throne ; I will
               seat myself on a lofty mountain—on the lofty mountains which
        14 face the north.                         I will ascend above the clouds ; I will be like
        15 the Most High.                             But thou must now go down to the mansion
        16 of the dead—even down to the foundations of the earth.                                                                         They
               who see thee will express their amazement at thee and say, Is
        17 this the man who troubled the earth? who shook kings? who
               made the world a desert ? who, when he destroyed cities, never
        18 dismissed his captives ?                                 All the kings of the nations have been
               composed to rest with honour, every man in his own house.
        19 But thou shalt be cast out on the mountains, like an abomi-
                                                                (c) the chorus.
              XIY.                      ESAIAS.
         Oh.
             nable corse, with dying crouds, pierced with the sword, de-
             scending down to the mansion of the dead.
         20      As a mantle stained with blood cannot be clean; for
             the same cause neither canst thou be clean.      Because thou hast
             destroyed this land of mine, and hast slain this my people ; thou
         21 shalt not be of long continuance.        Wicked seed, prepare thy
             sons for slaughter, for the sins of their fathers ; that they may
         22 not rise and possess the land, and fill the world with wars.         I
             will indeed rise up against them, saith the Lord of hosts, and
         23 destroy their name and remnant and seed.        Thus saith the Lord,
             I will lay Babylonia waste : that porcupines may inhabit it ; and
             it shall be a desolation.   And I will plunge it in the miry gulf
         24 of destruction.    Thus saith the Lord of hosts, as I have spoken
             so it shall be ; and as I have determined, so it shall stand.       I
         25 will destroy the Assyrians on this land of mine ; and on these
             mountains of mine they shall be trodden down ; and their yoke
             shall be removed from my people ; and their reproach shall be
             taken from their shoulders.
         26      (p) This is the counsel which the Lord hath taken against
             the whole empire, and this is the hand which is lifted high
         27 against all the nations. For who can disannul what the holy God
             hath decreed ? and his hand which is lifted high, who can turn
             aside ?
          VIII.   In the year in which king Achaz died, this Oracle was de-
                                          livered.
          29     BEJOICE not, foreign tribes, with one consent, because the
             yoke of him who smote you is broken ; for from the seed of a
             serpent will come forth young asps, and their offspring will be
          30 flying serpents.   Forthe needy will be fed by him ; and in peace
             the needy will repose.       But with famine he will destroy thy
          31 seed—even the remnant of thy seed he will destroy.         Baise the
              mournful cry ye gates of cities ;      foreign tribes ! let harassed
              cities scream with one consent : for a smoke is coming from the
              north, which cannot be endured ; what then will the kings of
              nations say in reply ?
          32      "That the Lord hath founded Sion, and by him the poor
              of his people shall be saved."
                                                                                                                ;
                                                   ESAIAS.
      Ch. XV. XVI.
      XV.         IX.                 The Oracle against Moab.
                  IN the night Moab is destroyed ; for by night is destroyed
       2 the bulwark of Moab. Be in bitterness for yourselves ; for Debon
           also is destroyed.             Where your altar is, thither you will go up
           to weep for Nabau of Moab, Kaise the mournful cry.                                     On every
           head be baldness ; let all your arms be gashed with wounds.
        3 In the streets thereof, gird on sackcloth, and on its house tops
           make lamentation ; and in the streets thereof and in its lanes,
        4 raise ye all the mournful cry with weeping ; because Esebon
           and Eleale have screamed—even to Jassa their voice hath been
           heard ; therefore the lungs of Moab utter lowings ; her soul will
        5 be afflicted.           The heart of Moab within her uttereth lowings,
           which reach Segor : for she is a three headed heifer.                                 At the as-
           cent of Louith weepers will come up to thee ; by the way of
        6 Aroniim destruction and dismay are roaring.                                     The water of
            Xemereim will be dried up ; and its grass will fail ; there will be
        7 no green grass.             But even thus it shall not be saved ; for I will
        8 bring the Arabs against that valley ; and they shall take it. For
            the cry of war touched the border of Moab at Agaleim, and
        9 the scream thereof reacheth even to the well of Aileim.                                     As for
            the water of Deimon, it shall be full of blood ; for I will bring
            the Arabians against Deimon, and carry off the seed of Moab
      XVI.            and Ariel ; and the remnant of Adama I will send away
            as reptiles on the earth.              Is Petra a desert ?             There is the moun-
        2 tain of the daughter of Sion [to fly to] for thou shalt be—(like
            the young of a flown bird carried away) Thou, Moab, shalt be
            a vassal ; and after that there will be a greater tribute of lambs.
        3        Take counsel [0 Sion] and make for her every where a
            shelter from grief.             In midnight darkness they will flee.                        They
        4 are confounded. Be not thou incensed. Let the fugitives of Mo-
            ab sojourn with thee.                 They will be a shelter to you from the
            face of a pursuer.            Because thy share in the war is taken away ;
            and the chief who trampled down is destroyed from this land
        5 therefore a throne shall be established with mercy, and on it
            one shall be seated with truth ; in the tabernacle of David, exe-
            cuting justice, and searching out judgment and promoting
            righteousness.
         Oh. XVII.                       ESAIAS.
          6      (s) " We have heard of the haughtiness of Moab—he is very
             insolent."
                 (J) This haughtiness I have totally removed.
          7      " Is not this, is not this the oracle concerning thee ?     Moab
             shall raise the mournful cry, for in the country of Moab they
             shall all utter the cry of woe, but to them who dwell in the
             habitations of Seth thou shalt extend care and shalt not be
          8 ashamed."     The plains of Esebon shall mourn—the vineyard
             Sebama.    Ye who drink up the nations, trample down her
             vineyards to Jazer.     You need not march in close array : roam
             through the wilderness.     They who were dispatched were wholly
             given up, for they passed through quite to the sea.
          9   (p) Let me therefore weep, as with the weeping of Jazer, for the
             vineyards of Sebama.      He hath cut down thy trees,          Esebon
             and Eleale.
               (J) Because in harvest and at thy vintage I will trample down
         10 and all shall be laid prostrate ; therefore gladness and the shout
             of joy shall be taken from the vineyards.      And in thy vineyards
             they shall not rejoice, nor tread out wine in thy cisterns, for a
             stop is put to the shout of joy.
         11 (p) For Moab therefore will my bowels sound like a kithara,
         12 and my entrails, as when thou didst consecrate a wall ; but it
             will be for the purpose of making thee ashamed.          Because Mo-
             ab had tired himself at the altars, therefore he will go in to the
             works of his hands ; that they may intercede ; but they shall
             not be able to deliver him.
         13      This is the decree which the Lord pronounced against
         14 Moab, when he spoke.        And now I say, within three years of
             the years of an hireling the glory of Moab shall be debased
             with all his abundant wealth ; and he shall be left few in num-
             ber and of no estimation.
         XVII. X.              TJie Oracle against Damascus.
                 BEHOLD Damascus shall be removed from among cities,
           2 and shall be for desolation—left for ever for the folding of
             flocks, and for a resting place where none will scare them.
           3 And it shall no more be a fortress for Ephraim to flee to ; nor
                                          (s) Sion.
                                                                                                               ;::
     Ch. XVIII.                                    ESAIAS.
          shall there be again a regal government in Damascus—ever
          hereafter, of the Syrians.                For thou art not better than the chil-
           dren of Israel—than that which was their glory.                               Thus saith the
       I Lord of hosts, there shall be in that day a diminution of the
          glory of Jacob ; and the fatness of his glory shall be shaken
       5 and it shall be as when one gathereth the standing harvest
          and reapeth the ears of stalks ; nay, it shall be as when one ga-
           thereth stalks in a sterile vale, still a stalk may be left in it
       6 or like the unripe berries of an olive tree, two or three may be
          left on the topmost bough, or four or five among the branches.
       7        Thus saith the Lord the God of Israel, in that day let man
          trust in his maker, and his eyes look to the Holy One of Israel
       8 and let him no more put confidence in altars, nor in the works
           of their hands which their fingers have made, nor look to the
           groves nor to their abominations.
       9        In that day thy cities shall be forsaken, as the Amorites
           and Evites forsook theirs because of the sons of Israel : and
           they shall become a desolation.
      10        Because thou hast forsaken G-od thy Saviour, and hast
           not been mindful of the Lord thy helper, therefore thou shalt
     11 plant a faithless plant and a faithless seed.                                On the day thou
           plantest thou shalt be deceived.                        Though thou sowest in the
           morning, shall it bloom for harvest ? or on the day when thou
           shalt take possession, shalt thou as the father of man take pos-
           session for thy sons ?
      12         Alas ! the multitude of many nations !                         Like the billowy sea
           so shall you be tossed, and the back of many nations shall
      13 sound like water.                   The multitude of nations being like a
           great flood, their flight shall be like that of a mighty torrent roll-
           ing on impetuously.                For he will repulse them with scorn, and
           pursue them to a great distance, like chaff before the wind
           when men winnow, or as a tempest driveth the dust of a wheel.
      14 Toward evening there will be grief; before morning they shall
           be no more.            This is the portion of them who have plundered
           you ; and this the inheritance of them, who have taken posses-
           sion of you.
      XVIII.             Ah! wings of the land of ships!                          Thou who surpass-
        2 est the Ethiopian streams, thou who art sending pledges by
           sea, and paper messages on the water ; for swift messengers
                 VOL. II.                               3 A
                                     ESAIAS.
         Ch. XIX.
            will go to a lofty nation, and to a strange and fierce people.
            There is one far transcending it.   With regard to the nation
            without hope and trodden down, at this time,     all ye streams
          3 of that land, like an inhabited country, their country shall be
            inhabited.  As if a signal were displayed from a mountain, as
         4 with the sound of a trumpet, let the news be spread.   For thus
            hath the Lord said to me, "There shall be safety in this city
            of mine ; like the light of noontide heat ; and it shall be like a
            dewy cloud in a harvest day."
         5     Before the vintage, when the blossom is perfect, and the
            young grape is swelling in the blossom ; the diminutive bunch-
            es are to be cut off with pruning hooks, and the small shoots,
         6 to be nip'd off and cut away, and left together for the birds of
            the air, and for the wild beasts of the earth.And against them
            will be gathered all the birds of the air ; and all the wild beasts
         7 of the earth will come upon it.At that time gifts will be brought
           to the Lord of Hosts from a people afflicted and peeled—even
            on account of a people great from this time and forever.     A
            nation having hope, though trodden down, which is in a part of
            the river of its country, will send them to the place of him,
            whose name is the Lord of Hosts, even to mount Sion.
        XIX.      XL        A vision concerning Egypt
         1     BEHOLD the Lord is seated on a swift cloud ; and he will
            come into Egypt; and the idols of Egypt shall be moved at
            his presence ; and the heart of the people shall melt within them.
         2 And they shall be stirred up, Egyptians against Egyptians,
            aud shall fight ; brother against brother and neighbour against
         3 neighbour, city against city, and nome against nomc.   And the
            spirit of the Egyptians shall be troubled within them : and I
            will dissipate their counsel; and they will consult their gods
            and their idols; and them who cause a voice to proceed from
         4 the ground, namely the belly speakers.      And I will deliver
            Egypt into the hands of men—cruel lords ; and fierce kings
            shall have dominion over them.
         5     Thus saith the Lord of Hosts, The Egyptians drink water even
         6 that near the sea, but the river shall fail and be dried up—both
            the streams and the canals of the river shall fail ; and every col-
            lection of water shall be dried up, even every fen, where reeds
                                                                                                                                      :
                 XIX.                                          ESAIAS.
        Cb.
          7 and papyrus grow.                         And all the quick springing herbage which
              is around the river, and every thing which is sown by the river
          8 shall be dried up and withered by the wind.                                                   And the fisher-
              men shall mourn—all who cast drags in the river shall mourn ;
              and they who spread nets and they who are anglers shall grieve
          9 and shame shall seize them who work the split flax, and them
        10 who work up the cotton.                                  They who are employed in such
              works shall be in sorrow ; and they who brew beer shall mourn
              and be grieved in soul.
        11           The princes of Tanis shall be fools, those wise counsellors
              of the king, their counsel shall be turned into folly.                                                   How can
              you say to the king, We are sons of wise men, sons of ancient
        12 kings? Where now are these wise men of thine? Let them tell
              thee publickly and declare what the Lord of hosts hath deter-
              mined against Egypt.
        13           The princes of Tanis have failed; and the princes of Mem-
              phis are exalted, and they will lead Egypt astray, tribe by
        14 tribe.           For the Lord hath mingled for them a spirit of error, and
              they with all their works have made Egypt reel, as a drunk-
        15 ard doth, when he is vomiting.                                    So that there shall be no work
              among the Egyptians, of which one can make head or tail, be-
        16 ginning or end.                      And in that day the Egyptians shall be like
              women in fear and trembling because of the hand of the Lord
              of Hosts which he will lay upon them.
        17           And the country of the Jews will be a terror to the Egyp-
              tians : when any one shall mention it to them, they will be in
              terror, because of the counsel which the Lord of Hosts hath
         18 determined against it.                           In that day there shall be five cities in
              Egypt which shall speak the language of Chanaan.                                                     And swear
              by the name of the Lord of Hosts : and one of them shall be
        19 called the city of Asedek.                            And in that day there shall be an al-
              tar for the Lord in the country of the Egyptians, and at its
        20 boundary a pillar for the Lord, and it shall be an everlasting
              sign for the Lord, in the country of Egypt.                                            Because they will
              cry to the Lord on account of their oppressors, therefore he
              will send them a man who will save them : he will vindicate their
        21 cause and deliver them.                             And the Lord will be made known to
              the Egyptians, and the Egyptians will acknowledge the Lord
                                                                                                                             ;
            Ch. XX. XXI.                                     ESAIAS.
                  in that day, and offer sacrifices and make vows to the Lord
            22 and perform them.                      Thus will the Lord smite the Egyptians
                  and heal them, and they shall be turned to the Lord, and he
                  will hearken to them and heal them.
            23          In that day this will be the highway from Egypt to Assyria
                  and Assyrians will come to Egypt and Egyptians to Assy-
            24 ria ; and the Egyptians shall serve the Assyrians.                                          In that day
                  Israel shall be a third, among the Egyptians and among the
                  Assyrians, blessed in the land which the Lord of Hosts hath
                  blessed saying,
                        "Blessed is my people which is in Egypt, and which is
                  in Assyria and Israel which is mine inheritance."
                  XX. XII. IN the year that Tanathan having been sent by
                  Arna king of Assyria went to Azotus and fought against it
                  and took it, at that time the Lord spoke to Esaias son of Amos
                   saying, " Go and take the sackcloth from thy loins and loose
                   thy sandals from thy feet ; and having done so walk stripp'd and
               3 bare foot."             And the Lord said, As my servant Esaias hath
                   walked stripp'd and bare foot, three years ; three years he shall
               4 be for signs and wonders to the Egyptians, and Ethiopians,
                   that in this manner the king of Assyria will lead away the
                   captives of Egypt and Ethiopia, young and old, naked and
               5 barefoot, exposing to view the shame of Egypt.                                                And they
                   being subdued shall be ashamed of the Ethiopians in whom
                   the Egyptians had placed confidence; for they were their
               6 glory.         And in that day the inhabitants of this country will say,
                         Behold we trusted to flee for help to them, who were un-
                   able to deliver themselves from the king of Assyria : how then
                   shall we escape ?
              XXL XIII.                            The vision of the Desert.
                          AS, when a whirlwind having passed through a desert, is
                    rushing out of a desert, the sight from the land is terrible;
                    this vision being also dreadful, was revealed to me.                                         The trea-
                    cherous dealeth treacherously ; the transgressor transgresseth ;
                    the Elamites are upon me ; and the elders of the Persians are
                    coming against me.                   Am I now to groan and comfort myself?
                                                                                          -
      Ch. XXII.                            ESAIAS.
       3 For this cause my loins are filled with fainting ; pangs have seiz-
          ed me like a woman in travail.          I did wrong not to hear ; I shud-
       4 dered so that I could not see.          Myheart is bewildered, transgres-
          sion overwhelmeth me.          Mysoul is on the brink of despair. Pre-
       5 pare the table.        Eat, drink ye chiefs.         Having arisen prepare
       fi shields.    Because thus the Lord said to me, "Go set a watch
       7 man for thyself and proclaim what thou seest."                    Thereupon 1
          beheld a chariot with two riders, and a rider on an ass and a
          rider on a camel.
              "Listen with the utmost attention, said the Lord, and call
       8 " A fair breeze to the watch tower " I have kept my station all
          the day long, and by the camp I have stood the whole night ; and
       9 behold here cometh a man riding in a chariot, and addressing
          me he said, " It is fallen !      Babylon is fallen ! and all her images,
          and all the works of her hands are dashed on the ground."
      10      Hear this ye who have been forsaken ! and ye, who have
          been sorely grieved, hear what I have heard from the Lord of
          Hosts—what the God of Israel hath announced to us.
          XIV.               The vision concerning Humect.
      11       TO me one calleth from Seir, "Guard ye the fortifica-
      12 tions," I keep watch morning and night.                  If thou wouldst in-
      13 quire ; inquire and dwell near me.              Thou mayst go to rest in
          the western forest, or in the way to Dedan.
      14          inhabitants of the country of Thaiman, bring out water
          to meet the thirsty ; meet with bread them who are fleeing,
      15 because of the multitude of the slain ; and because of the mul-
          titude of dispersed : and because of the multitude of swords ;
          and because of the multitude of bended bows ; and because
      16 of the multitude of them who have fallen in battle.                    For thus
          hath the Lord said to me, " Within a year, according to the
          year of an hireling, the glory of the children of Kedar shall
          fail ; and the remnant of the mighty bowmen of Kedar shall
          be small.     For the Lord God of Israel hath spoken."
      XXII. XV.            The Oracle concerning the valley of Sion.
               WHAT aileth thee, that you are all now gone up to the
        2 house tops?        This vain city is full of people shouting.               Thy
          slain are not slain with the sword ; nor have thy dead died in
       Ch. XXII.                ESAIAS.
        3 battle.All thy chiefs have fled and they who are taken are cru-
          elly bound. Even the mighty men in thee have fled far away.
        4    Therefore I said, Let me alone ; let me weep bitterly : la-
          bour not to comfort me, for this distress of the daughter of my
        5 people. For it is a day of trouble and destruction and tread-
          ing down.  There is indeed some wandering from the Lord of
          Hosts ; in the valley of Sion they are wandering about ; from
          the least to the greatest they are wandering on the mountains.
        6 But the Elamites have taken up their quivers ; and the horse-
          men have mounted their horses; and the army is arrayed in
        7 order for battle ; and on they will come.Thy choicest valleys
          shall be filled with chariots ; and the horsemen will block up
        8 thy gates, and burst open the gates of Juda ; and look, on that
          day, into the choicest houses of the city; and lay open the
        9 stores of the houses of David's citadel.They indeed know that
          they are many, and that the water of the old pool is turned into
       10 the city, and that the houses of Jerusalem have been pulled
          down, to fortify the wall in the city.
       11    You have indeed provided water for yourselves, between
          the two walls nearer than the old pool, and have not looked to
          him who formed it of old, nor regarded him who created it.
       12    Though the Lord of hosts, on that day, called for mourn-
          ing, and lamentation, and for shaving of hair and girding with
       13 sackcloth, yet they indulged themselves in joy and gladness,
          slaying oxen and sacrificing sheep, that they might eat flesh
          and drink wine, saying, "Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow
       14 we die." Yes, these were their undisguised expressions, in the
          hearing of the Lord of hosts, therefore this sin will not be for-
       15 given you till you die.Thus saith the Lord of Hosts, Go to
       16 the treasury—to Somnas the steward, and say to him, Why
          art thou here? and what hast thou here? that thou hast hewn
          out for thyself a monument, and hast made for thyself a se-
          pulchre on high, and graved for thyself a tabernacle in a rock ?
       17 Behold the Lord of hosts is now driving out and will utterly
          destroy men of rank, and he will take away thy robe and this
       18 gorgeous crown of thine, and whirl thee into a large immea-
          surable country, and there thou shalt die.And he will bring
          to disgrace thy splendid chariot, and make the house of thy
       19 chief a publick walk.And when thou shalt be removed from
                                                                             —;:
     Ch. XXIII.                      ESAIAS.
     20 thine office and station : it shall come to pass in that day, that
     21 I will call my servant Eliakim son of Chelkias, and clothe him
         with thy robe.    And this crown of thine I will confirm to him,
         and I will commit to his hands this office of thine : and he shall
         be as a father to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and to them who
     22 dwell in Juda.      And I will give him the glory of David, and
         he shall rule and there shall be no antagonist ; and on his should-
         er I will lay the key of the house of David ; and he will open
         and none shall shut ; and he will shut and none shall open
     23 and I will make him a ruler in a sure place, and he shall be a
     24 throne of glory for the house of his father.        And on him will
         rely with confidence, every honourable man in his father's
         house, from the least even to the greatest.       On him they shall
         be dependant in that day.
     25      Thus saith the Lord of Hosts, The man who is now fixed
         in a sure place shall be removed and taken away and shall fall
         and the glory which is on him shall be utterly destroyed for
         the Lord hath spoken it.
     XXIII.        XYI.       The Oracle concerning Tyre.
             EAISE the mournful cry,            ships of Carthage, for Tyre
         is destroyed and there are no arrivals from the land of the Ki-
         tians.  She is carried away captive.
      2      Who could be compared with the dwellers in this island
       3 these merchants of Phoenicia, who traversed the ocean—this
         offspring of merchants on many a water, who made a traffick
         of nations as of an ingathered harvest ?
      4      Be ashamed,       Sidon, said the sea—even the strength of
         the sea said,
             "I did not travail nor did I bring her forth; nor did I
       5 nourish her youths, nor educate her virgins; yet when the
         news shall reach Egypt, sorrow for Tyre will take hold on
         them."
       6     Away to Carthage !      Eaise the mournful cry, ye who inha-
       7 bit that isle !   Was not she your boast of old, before she was
         delivered up ?
       8     " WJw hath taken this counsel against the Tyrians ?         Is she
         inferior ?  Or hath she not power 1      Her merchants are glorious
         chiefs of the earth."
             XXIV.                      ESAIAS.
        Ch.
         9      The Lord of Hosts hath determined to destroy all the
            haughtiness of the glorious ; and to bring to contempt every
            thing glorious on the earth.
        10      Work thy land : for ships no more arrive from Carthage,
            nor is thy hand which vexed kings, any more powerful by
        11 sea.   The Lord of Hosts hath given a command, concerning
        12 Chanaan, to destroy its power: and shall it be said, You must
            not proceed to insult and distress the daughter of Sidon ?       Nay
            though thou shouldst go to the Kitians; yet even there thou
        13 shalt not have rest.    Away to the land of the Chaldeans, though
            it hath been wasted by the Assyrians; because its walls had
            fallen.
        14      Raise the mournful cry,           ships of Carthage, because
            your strong hold is destroyed.
        15      And it shall come to pass in that day, that Tyre shall be
            forsaken seventy years, according to the days of a king, ac-
            cording to the time of a man.      And it shall come to pass after
            seventy years, that Tyre shall be as the song of a harlot.
        16      Take a kithara, stroll about,       city, O harlot long forgot-
            ten ! Play skilfully ; sing many songs, that thou mayst be re-
        17 membered.      And it shall come to pass after seventy years, that
            God will take account of Tyre, and she shall be restored to
            her former state, and be a mart for all the kingdoms of the
        18 world ; which are on the face of the earth.      And her traffick and
            gain shall be holy to the Lord.      All her gain shall not be trea-
            sured up for themselves, but for them who dwell before the
            Lord, that they may eat and drink and be filled, and for con-
            tributions to be kept in remembrance before the Lord.
         XXIY. XVII. Sect. 1. BEHOLD the Lord is about to de-
            stroy this inhabited land !    He will lay it waste and uncover the
          2 face thereof and scatter abroad them who dwell therein.           And
            it shall be as with the people so with the priest; as with the
            servant, so with the master ; as with the maid, so with the mis-
             tress ; as with the buyer, so with the seller, as with the lender,
             so with the borrower ; as with the debtor, so with the credit-
          3 or.   With destruction the land will be destroyed, and with
             spoiling this land will be ransacked : for the mouth of the Lord
          4 hath spoken this.      The land mourned and this empire is de-
       5                                                                                                      !
            XXIV.                                  ESAIAS.
      Ch.
       5 stroyed—the lofty people of the land mourned.                                        As for the
           land, it transgressed by means of its inhabitants.                             Because they
           transgressed the law, and changed the institutions—the ever-
       6 lasting covenant, therefore a curse devoureth the land.                                          Be-
           cause they who dwell therein have sinned, therefore the inha-
           bitants of the land shall be distressed, and few are the men
       7 who shall be left.                  The wine will mourn, the vineyard will
       8 mourn, and all that were merry-hearted will sigh.                                     The mirth
           of the tabrets hath ceased, the sound of the kithara is no more.
       9 They are confounded : they have drunk no wine.                                         The palm
     10 wine was bitter to them who drank it.                                Every city is desolat-
           ed—the houses will be shut up that none may enter.
      11        Kaise the mournful cry every where for the wine.                                     A stop
           is put to all the joy of the land—all the joy of the land is gone.
      12 The cities will be left desolate, and the houses being forsaken
     13 will be destroyed.                 All this shall come to pass in this land, in
           the midst of the nations.                As when one shall shake an olive tree,
           so shall they be shaken : and when the vintage is over a shout
           will be raised.
     14         But they who are left in the land shall be gladdened with
     1     the glory of the Lord.              The water of the sea will be troubled : for
           this cause the glory of the Lord will be in the isles of the sea.
           In the isles of the sea the name of the Lord will be glorious.
     15         (c) "        Lord the God of Israel ! from the outskirts of the
           earth we have heard of thy wonders : there is hope for the
           righteous."
           (p) Let them say also, " Woe to the rebels who reject the law
     17 Terror and a pit and a snare are for you who dwell in the land :
     18 and it shall come to pass, that he who fleeth from the terror,
           shall fall into the pit ; and he who getteth out of the pit, shall
           be caught by the snare.                 Because the flood gates of heaven are
           opened, therefore the foundations of the land shall be shaken.
     19 With confusion the land will be confounded ; with perplexity
     20 this land will be perplexed.                     It reeled to and fro like a drunkard
           when intoxicated : like a lodge in a vineyard the land shall be
           shaken. For iniquity hath prevailed over it ; and it shall fall and
     21 shall not be able to rise.                 When God shall bring his hand on the
     22 hosts of heaven, even upon the kings of this land ; and the con-
           gregation thereof shall have been assembled for imprisonment,
                VOL. II.                              3 B
                                                                                                           ;;
                XXV.                                ESA1AS.
          Ch.
               and shut up as chaff for many generations ; of them there shall
               be a visitation.
          23        (c) When the bricks shall have mouldered away, and the wall
               shall have fallen ; because the Lord will commence his reign
               from Sion and from Jerusalem, and be glorified in the presence
          XXV.            of the elders ;          Lord God, thee I will glorify : in songs
               of praise I will extol thy name.                  For thou hast executed won-
               derful things, a counsel of old immutably true.
            2       Because thou hast reduced cities to a heap of ruins—cities
                made strong, that their foundations might not fall ; (a city of
                wicked men cannot be built to last forever) therefore the dis-
            4 tressed people will bless thee and the cities of injured men
                will give thee thanks ; for thou hast been the support of every
                humble city and the defence of them who were dispirited
                by reason of their weakness.                From wicked men thou will de-
                liver them.        Thou art the support of the thirsty and the breath
                of men in distress.
             5       (p) When dispirited men shall be thirsting in Sion on ac-
                count of wicked men to whom thou hast delivered us up
             6 then will the Lord of Hosts make provision for all the nations.
             7 On this mount they shall drink gladness : they shall drink
                wine and be anointed with myrrh on this mount.                             Hand down
                all these things to the nations for this counsel is for all the na-
                tions.
             g       Mighty death had swallowed up ; but the Lord God hath
                again wiped every tear from every face ; and removed from the
                whole earth the reproach of this people.                     For the mouth of the
                Lord hath spoken.
             9       And in that day they will say, " Behold our God in whom
                we trusted, will indeed save us.                   He is the Lord, for him we
                waited and exulted ; let us therefore rejoice in our salvation.
                 God will give rest on this mountain."
            10    Sect. 2.      WHENthe country of Moab shall be trodden down,
            11 as a threshing floor is trampled with cars and he shall cause his
                 hands to relax, as he indeed humbled him to be slain, and
                 shall humble his pride—those things on which he hath laid
            12 his hands, and shall lower the height of his wall of refuge ; and
                 it shall be laid low in the dust : in that day shall this song be
                 sung in the land of Judea.
          XXVI.                       ESAIAS.
      Ch.
      XXVI.        (c.) " Behold we have a strong city ! he will make
         salvation its wall and outworks.     Openthe gates ; let the people
       2 enter, who keep righteousness and who keep truth ; who sup-
       3 port truth and keep peace ; because their confidence is placed
       4 in thee,       Lord ! who art to everlasting, the Mighty, the
       5 Eternal God, who hast humbled and brought down them who
       6 dwell in lofty places.     Fortified cities thou canst demolish and
          level them with the dust, that the feet of the meek and lowly
       7 may trample them.         The way of the pious was straight ; the
          way of the pious was well prepared; for the way of the
       9 Lord is justice.     We have trusted in thy name and in that
          remembrance which is the desire of our soul by night.
          To thee,     God, my spirit awaketh early, because thy statutes
          are a light on the earth.        Learn righteousness ye dwellers
      10 on earth, for the wicked one is no more.            Whoever will not
          learn justice on earth, cannot act agreeably to truth.             Let
          the wicked be removed that he may not see the glory of
      11 the Lord.      Thy hand,      Lord, was lifted high ; but they did
          not know it; but when they know they will be ashamed. Zeal
          will seize an uninstructed people ; even now a fire devoureth
          the adversaries.
      12         Lord, our God, grant us peace, for thou hast forgiven us
      13 all things.        Lord, our God, take possession of us ! besides
          thee,    Lord, we know none other. We celebrate thy name. As
      14 for those who are dead they would not see life, nor could physi-
          cians raise them up ; therefore thou hast removed and destroy-
          ed and taken away all their males.         Heap,     Lord, evils upon
          them—Heap evils on the vainglorious of the earth.
      16         Lord, in affliction I remembered thee.       Thine instruction
      17 to us was with a small affliction ; and as a woman in labour,
          when near delivery, crieth in her pangs, so have we been to thy
      18 beloved.     On account of the fear of thee,        Lord, we conceiv-
          ed and suffered the pangs of child birth, and brought forth the
          spirit of thy salvation ; for what we did in that land we are not
          to fall ; but all the dwellers in that land are to fall.
       19     (p) The dead shall be raised up again, even they in the
          tombs shall be raised up : and they in this land shall be filled
          with joy : for the dew from thee is healing for them ; but the
       20 land of the ungodly shall fall.       Go my people, enter into thy
                                                                                                                                                          !
                       XXVII.                                              ESAIAS.
               Ch.
                      chambers ; shut thy door : hide thyself for a little while ; until
               21 the anger of the Lord is passed.                                                For behold the Lord from
                      his sanctuary is about to bring wrath on the inhabitants of this
                      land; and the land will disclose the blood on it, and will no
                      longer coyer the slain.
               XXVII.                     In that clay God will bring his holy sword, even his
                      great and powerful sword, upon the dragon, the flying serpent
                      —Upon the dragon, the crooked serpent ; he will slay the dra-
                      gon.
                 2           In that day the fair vineyard—I have a mind to lead a re-
                      sponsive song against this.
                 3      (c)        I am a strong city, a city besieged.
                        (v)        In vain shall I supply her with drink : for by night she
                 4 will be taken, and by day she will fall.                                                      There is no wall, or
                      it hath not availed her.                             Will any one set me to watch a stalk
                      in a field ?              On account of this warfare I have rejected her.
                 o      (c)       For this cause therefore the Lord hath executed all that
                      he determined.                     I am about to be burned up.
                        (v)        Let the inhabitants therein cry aloud, " Let us make
                      peace with him.                      Let us make peace."
                 6      (p)        They who are coming are children of Jacob.                                                      Israel shall
                 7 bloom and blossom ; and the world shall be filled with his fruit.
                     He shall not, as he smote, be so smitten : nor, as he slew, shall he
                 8 be so slain.                  Having fought and disgraced them he will let them
                      go.        Thou hast not been visiting with this severe wind, to de-
                      stroy them utterly with a blast of anger.
                 9      (J)        By means of this the iniquity of Jacob will be removed :
                      and this will be to him a subject of thanksgiving, when I take
                      away his sin—when they grind to powder all the hewn stones
                      of their altars, and their groves no longer remain, and their
               10 idols hack'd to pieces like a forest are far away.                                                                The folded
                      flock shall be disconsolate, like a flock which hath been forsa-
                      ken ; and for a long time the country shall be for a pasture, and
               11 flocks shall there take their rest.                                           And after a time there will
                      be no verdure in it, by reason of its being parched up.
                             (p)          ye women who are coming from a goddess attend
                      For this is not a people, who have understanding ; therefore he
                                                      (c) the city.                   (v) the vineyard.
                                                                            —;
      Oh. XXVIII.                     ESAIAS.
          who made them will not have pity on them ; nor will he who
      12 formed them shew them any favour.
                (J) But it shall come to pass in that day, that God will hedge
         them about from the channel of the river even to Rinocorouron.
      13 Therefore gather ye the sons of Israel together one by one.
         And it shall come to pass in that day, that the great trumpet
          shall be sounded and those shall come who are perishing in the
         land of Assyria, and they who are perishing in Egypt; and
          shall bow themselves down before the Lord, on this holy
          mountain in Jerusalem.
      XXVIII.       Sect. 3.   (p) AH ! the crown of haughtiness !         The
          mercenaries of Ephraim !      That flower which hath fallen from
         the glory on the top of the fertile mountain !          Ye who are
       2 drunk without wine !     Behold the wrath of the Lord is a harsh
         and terrible thing.   Like a tempest of hail furiously driven when
         there is no shelter, like a mighty deluge sweeping a country.
       3 In this land it will put a stop to the labour of hands ; and with
         the feet shall be trampled down the crown of your pride,
       4 mercenaries of Ephraim.       And the flower which hath dropped
         from the hope of the Glory, on the top of the lofty mountain,
         shall be like the early fruit of a fig tree, which he who seeth it
         will wish to devour, before he can get it into his hand.
       5     In that day the Lord of Hosts will be the crown of hope
       6 the diadem of glory to the remnant of the people.         They shall
         be left for the spirit of Justice—to administer justice and de-
       7 stroy the power of the opposers.     For by wine these were made
         transgressors ; they were led astray by strong drink.     Priest and
         prophet were stupefied with strong drink ; they were gorged
         with wine—they were agitated by drunkenness ; they reeled to
       8 and fro.   This is oracling !  A curse shall devour their counsel
         for their counsel is for the sake of gain.
       9      (f) " To   whom,    [say  they]   have   toe  announced    evils ?
         And to whom have ive announced a message—we who have
          been weaned from milk, ive who have been withdrawn from the
         breasts ?  Expect affliction on affliction ; hope on hope, yet a little
         while—yet a little while.                           —because they
      10     On account of the mockery of their lips
         will speak to this people with a strange tongue, saying to them,
                 (f) The sententious speeches of the false prophets.
                   XXVIII.                                   ESAIAS.
            Ch.
                  " This i$ the rest for him who is hungry : and this is the de-
            12 struction, hut they would not hear"                                   Therefore the oracle of
                  God will be to them " Affliction on affliction                                  hope on hope, yet
                                                                                               ;
                  a little while, yet a little while" that they may proceed on
                  and fall backwards ; and they shall be broken and snared and
            14 caught.             Therefore hear the word of the Lord, ye afflicted
            15 men, and ye rulers of this people in Jerusalem !                                          Because you
                  said, " We have made a covenant with death : and with the grave
                  we have made a treaty : though the furious tempest may pass
                  through, it will by no means reach us.                              We have made falsehood
                  our refuge and by thisfalsehood we shall be saved."
            16          Therefore thus saith the Sovereign Lord ; behold I lay for
                  the foundation of Sion a stone of inestimable worth—a chosen,
                  precious corner-stone for the foundations of it, and he who be-
            17 lieveth shall not be ashamed.                             And I will establish judgment
                  for hope, and my mercy shall be for scales.                                        But as for you
                  who have vainly trusted in falsehood, that the tempest would
            18 not reach you; and that it would not break your treaty with
                  death ; the hope which you have with respect to the grave shall
                  not last : when the furious tempest cometh, by it you shall be
            19 beaten down. When it cometh it will overtake you.                                            Early, very
                  early in the morning it will come, and at night your hope will
            20 be wretched.                 Learn to hear, " We are straitened for room, we
            21 cannotfight.               We are weakened by your pressing upon us."                                   Like
                  a mountain of wicked men the Lord will rise up ; and he will
                  be in the valley of Gabaon.                          With wrath he will execute his
                  work—a work of bitterness; and his wrath will attack in a
            22 strange manner; and its severity will be unusual.                                                    As for
                  you therefore, be not filled with joy, yet let not your bonds
                  gather strength.                  For the things are complete and decisive
                  which I have heard from the Lord of Hosts—which he will ex-
                  ecute on all this land.
            23          Listen and hear my voice ; attend and hearken to these
            24 words of mine.                   Will the ploughman plough the whole day ?
            25 Or prepare seed before he hath tilled the ground ?                                                Doth he
                  not, when he hath levelled the face of the soil, then sow the
                  small dill or cummin ? and again sow wheat and barley and
             26 millet and rye in all thy borders?                                So thou shalt be corrected
             27 by the judgment of God ; and be made glad.                                            For the dill is
                      —                                                                                                   ;
       Ch. XXIX.                                        ESAIAS.
             not cleaned with a corn drag ; nor is the wheel of a wain to
             turn round on the cummin ; but with a rod are beaten out
             the dill—and cummin.
       28          (J) Yet with bread they will be eaten.                                    For I, The I am
             will not be angry with you forever, nor shall the voice of my
             severity destroy you.                    These wonders have indeed proceeded
             from the Lord of Hosts.
       XXIX.                Hold consultation ; exalt vain comfort.                               Ah city Ariel,
             against which David fought ! collect provisions year after year
         2 eat ;       for you shall eat with Moab ; for I will bring distress
             upon Ariel, and her strength and her riches shall be for me.
         3 I will indeed encompass thee as David did ; and surround
         4 thee with a rampire ; and erect towers around thee.                                            But when
             thy words shall be brought down to the ground ; and shall be as
             if they sounded out of the earth ; and thy voice on the ground
         5 shall be feeble ; then shall the riches of the wicked be as the
             dust of a wheel, and the multitude of thine oppressors as chaff
         6 blown away : and this shall be as in a moment, suddenly.                                                  For
             from the Lord of Hosts there will be a visitation—a hurricane
              and a devouring flame of fire, with thunder and an earthquake
          7 and a mighty noise ; and the wealth of all the nations which
              encamped against Ariel, and all they who are warring against
              Jerusalem, and all who have been assembled against her, and
              those distressing her, shall be like one dreaming dreams by
          8 night : and like men who in sleep are eating and drinking, but
              when they awake the dream is vain : even as a thirsty man
              dreameth that he drinketh, and when he waketh he is still
              athirst, his soul having trusted in a shadow : so shall be the
              wealth of all the nations, who have warred against mount
              Sion.
          9         (p) Be sunk in dejection and stand astonished ; be drunk
        10 and reel, not with wine nor strong drink; for the Lord hath
              drenched you with a spirit of stupefaction, and will close up
        11 the eyes of them and of their prophets and their rulers.                                              As for
              your seers of hidden things, all these prophesies will be to you
              like the words of a book which is sealed : which when they
              give to a man skilled in letters, saying, Eead this : He will say,
         12 I cannot read it, for it is sealed.                           And should the book be put
                                                                                                                            ;
                  XXX.                                      ESAIAS.
           Ch.
                 in the hands of an illiterate man, and they say to him, Bead
                 that, he will say, I do not know letters.
           13          The Lord hath indeed said, (J) "This people draw near
                 to me with their mouth ; and with their lips they honour me
                 but their heart is far from me : and in vain do they worship
           14 me, teaching the commands and doctrines of men : therefore,
                behold, I will proceed to the removal of this people and I will
                remove them ; and destroy the wisdom of the wise, and dark-
           15 en the understanding of the prudent."                                     Alas! for them, who
                deeply form a design, but not by the Lord.                                        Alas ! for them,
                who form designs in secret, that their works may be in dark-
                ness ;      and who will say, "Who hath seen us, and who can
           16 find out us, or what we do?"                               Are not you to be considered
                 as the potter's clay ?                Shall the thing formed say to the former
                 of it, thou hast not made me.                             Or shall the work say to the
           17 workman thou hast not made me wisely?                                            Is it not a little
                 while, ere Libanus shall be changed to a likeness of mount Car-
           18 mel ?            And Carmel be accounted a forest ?                                And in that day
                 the deaf shall hear the words of a book, and they in darkness,
                 even they in thick darkness—the eyes even of the blind
           19 shall see; and the distressed shall exult with joy because of
                 the Lord; and the disconsolate among men shall be filled
           20 with joy.             The lawless one hath failed, and the haughty one is
                 destroyed, and these are utterly cut off who maliciously coni-
           21 mit iniquity, and who by reasoning cause men to err.                                            But as for
                 all them who reprove in the gates they will indeed lay a stum-
                 bling block, because of their having turned aside the righteous
            22 one for the unrighteous, therefore, thus saith the Lord respecting
                  the house of Jacob, whom he set apart from Abraham ; " Jacob
                  will not be ashamed now, nor will he now change his counte-
            23 nance ; but when his children shall see my works, because of
                  me they will hallow my name.                                They will hallow the Holy
            24 One of Jacob, and tremble before the God of Israel.                                            And they
                  who have erred in spirit will gain knowledge, and the mur-
                  murers shall be taught obedience, and the trifling tongues will
                  learn to speak peace."
            XXX.                Sect. 4.         "AH rebellious children! saith the Lord,
                  you have formed a design, but not by me: and thou hast
                                                                                     ——
      Cb. XXX.                           ESAIAS.
          made convenants, but not by my spirit, that you may add sins
          to sins.
       2       " They are setting out to go down to Egypt, without hav-
          ing consulted me—to be assisted by Pharao and protected by
       3 the Egyptians.         For the protection of Pharao will be your
          shame, and a disgrace to them who have trusted in Egypt.
       4 Because generals are unwelcome messengers at Tanis, they
       5 shall labour in vain with a people who will be of no service
          for assistance ; but for a shame and disgrace.
        6'     This is the vision of the four footed beasts in the desert
          A lion and a lion's whelp were in distress and difficulty ; and
          from them went the asps and the brood of flying serpents,
          who carried their wealth on asses and camels to a nation which
           could not profit them.
        7      In vain and to no purpose will the Egyptians help you.
           Announce to them, That this application of yours is vain.
        8      Now therefore sit down and write these things in a tablet
           and make a book that they may be for the appointed time
        9 even for the time to come.            Because this is a rebellious peo-
      10 pie—lying children, who would not hear the law of God, who
           say to the prophets, " Preach not to us," and to them who see
           visions, " Speak not to us, nay, speak to us and tell us another
       11 error, and turn us from this way, and take from us this path,
           and take from us the oracle of Israel."
       12      Therefore thus saith the Holy One of Israel, because you
           have disbelieved these words and placed your hopes on a lie :
           and because thou hast murmured, and been confident in this
       13 matter ; therefore this sin shall be to you like the tottering wall
           of a fortified city, which hath been taken by surprise ; the fall
       14 of which is instantaneous. And its fall shall be like the breaking
           of an earthen vessel, the fragments of which are so small that
           there cannot be found among them a sherd on which thou
           canst carry fire or with which thou canst scoop up a little
           water.
       15   Thus saith the Lord, Lord. The Holy One of Israel, when thou
           shalt return sighing, then thou shalt be saved, and thou shalt
           know in what a situation thou wast, when thou didst trust in
           these vanities.
               VOL. II.                       3 c
           XXX.                   ESAIAS.
       Ok
       16    Your strength was vain, yet you would not hearken, but
          said, " We will flee on horses."Therefore flee you shall.And,
          " We will mount swift coursers," therefore swift shall be your
          pursuers.
       17    Athousand shall flee at the voice of one ; and at the voice
          of five, many thousands shall flee : until you be left like a bea-
          con on a mountain, and like a flag staff upon a hill.
       18    (p) But again the Lord will wait to be gracious to you,
          and will therefore be exalted for compassionating you.    Be-
          cause the Lord your God is judge, happy are they who wait
       19 for him. Because a holy people will dwell in Sion, and Jerusa-
          lem with weeping cried, "Have mercy upon me."          There-
          fore he will have mercy upon thee.  When he heard the sound
       20 of thy cry, he hearkened to thee.  When the Lord shall have
          given you bread of affliction and stinted water, they who lead
          thee astray shall no more come near thee.      Because thine
       21 eyes will see them who are leading thee astray and thine ears
          will hear the words of the deceivers behind thee who say, This
       22 is the way let us walk in it, whether to the right or left ; there-
          fore thou wilt defile thine idols plated with silver, and cut to
          pieces those overlaid with gold, and scatter them like pollut-
       23 ed water and cast them out as dirt.  Then shall there be rain
          for the seed of thy land, and the bread of the increase of thy
          land shall be both abundant and nutritive ; and thy cattle shall
       24 feed in rich and large pastures.  Your bulls and your cattle
          which till the ground shall eat provender mixed with winnow-
       25 ed barley. And there shall be on every lofty mountain, and on
          every high hill streams of water in that day, when many shall
       26 be perishing and when towers may be falling.  And the light of
          the moon shall be as the light of the sun ; and the light of the
          sun shall on that day be seven fold; when the Lord will heal
          the bruises of his people, and when he will cure thy painful
          wound.
       27    Behold the name of the Lord cometh for a time, a burn-
          ing wrath.  The oracle of his lips with glory is an oracle full of
       28 indignation, and the fury of the wrath devoureth like fire ; and
          his breath is like a sweeping flood in a valley, which will reach
          up to the neck and swell to confound nations for their vain
          errors.
      Ch. XXXI.                         ESAIAS.
      29      When error shall pursue them and overtake them, before
          their face ought not you to rejoice continually and continually go
          to my solemnities like them who are celebrating a festival?
          Like them who are gladdened you should go with instrument-
      30 al music to the mount of the Lord, to the God of Israel.             When
          the Lord shall cause the glory of his voice to be heard—when,
          to display the fury of his arm with wrath and indignation and
          consuming fire, he shall utter tremendous thunder, accompa-
      31 nied with a furious tempest of rain and hail.           For by the voice
          of the Lord the Assyrians shall be beaten down by the stroke
          with which he will smite them.                                     —from
      32      This indeed he shall have from all around him
          every place whence they had a hope of that assistance on which
          he relied, they will with timbrels and the kithara fight against
      33 him, after his rout.       Of thee he will previously demand (and
          hast thou not provided for his reign) a deep valley and wood
          laid up in piles ; the wrath of the Lord will be fire and wood
          in abundance like a valley burning with brimstone.
      XXXI.        Sect. 5. ALAS! They went down to Egypt for help!
          They trusted in horses and chariots ; for they have many and
          their cavalry is very numerous ; and did not rely on the Holy
       2 One of Israel, nor did they ask counsel of the Lord.                 There-
          fore he in his wisdom brought evils on them : and that his
          word may not be slighted, he will rise up against the houses
       3 of wicked men and against this hope of theirs which is vain—
          against an Egyptian—a man, not a god—against the flesh of
          horses in which there is no help.        When the Lord shall lay his
       4 hand upon them, then shall these helpers fail and be all de-
          troyed together.     Because the Lord hath thus said to me,
              "As the lion or the young lion will roar over the prey
          which he hath taken ; and will repeat his roaring over it, until
          the mountains are filled with his voice, and the multitude are sub-
          dued and terrified at his wrath : so will the Lord of Hosts descend
          to encamp on this mountain—on this Sion—on the summits
       5 thereof: as birds hover over their young, so will the Lord of
          Hosts protect Jerusalem ; he will hover over it and spring for-
          ward, and will protect and save it."
       6*     Therefore turn to him, O children of Israel, who are tak-
          ing deep and wicked counsel.
                                                                                                                    ;;
           Ch. XXXIT.                                    ESAIAS.
             7        Because men will in that day reject the works of their
                 hands—their idols of silver and gold which their hands have
                made ; therefore Assur shall fall—not by the sword of a man
                of valour, nor shall the sword of a mortal devour him ; and he
                 shall flee—(not from the face of the sword) and the young
             9 men shall be for destruction.                     For with a rock they shall be en-
                 closed as with a rampart, and shall be subdued ; and he who
                fleeth shall be taken.
                      Thus saith the Lord,
                      " Happy he who hath a seed in Sion and a family in Jeru-
                 XXXII.              salem !       For behold a righteous king shall reign
             2 and chiefs shall rule with justice.                         And this man will be one
                 who hideth his words, and he will be hid as from a rolling
                flood.      And he will be seen on Sion like a glorious stream in a
             3 thirsty land.           And they shall no more put confidence in men
             4 but shall apply their ears to hear.                        And the heart of the weak
                 will listen attentively ; and trifling tongues will soon learn to
             5 speak peace.            And they will no more order the fool to govern,
             6 nor shall thy servants any more command silence.                                   For the fool
                 will speak foolishly, and his heart will devise vain things ; that
                 he may commit iniquity, and utter error before the Lord in or-
             7 der to scatter hungry souls : and the thirsty souls he will send
                 away empty.            For the counsel of the wicked will devise un-
                 lawful devices to destroy the poor with unjust pleas ; and to
             8 baffle the pleas of the poor in judgment.                              But the pious have
                 counselled with understanding ; and their counsel shall be es-
                 tablished."
             9         Sect. 6       (p)     AEISE ye rich women and hear my voice,
            10 hearken to my words ye daughters of hope! make mention of
                 a day of a year in sorrow, with hope.                       The vintage is destroyed
                 it hath failed ! must it never come again any more ?
            11        Be confounded; be grieved, ye confident women! strip;
            12 make yourselves bare ; gird your loins and beat your breasts,
            13 for the lovely field—for the fruitful vine.                            In this land of my
                 people shall spring up the thorn and the briar, and joy shall be
                 taken from every dwelling.
            14            rich city !          houses wholly forsaken ! They shall abandon
                 city, riches, lovely houses ; and until the age the villages shall
                 be dens—the joy of wild asses, the pastures of flocks, till a
            15 spirit come on you from on high.                          Then will a desert become a
                                          !                                                                             —
         Oh. XXXIII.                                      ESAIAS.
        16 Channel and Channel will be accounted a forest ; and judg-
              ment will make a lasting abode in the desert, and righteous-
        17 ness will dwell in Channel.                             And the works of righteousness
              shall be peace ; and righteousness shall enjoy rest.                                      As for them
              who have kept up their confidence till that age—his people
        18 shall then inhabit a city of peace and dwell secure, and they
        19 shall enjoy rest with riches.                         Though the hail descend, it shall
              not reach you : and they who dwell in the forest shall be secure
              as they in the plain.
                    (c) Happy they who sow on every water where the ox and
              the ass treadeth
        XXXIII. (p) Woe to them who miserably afflict you; but
              none can make you miserable.                                Even the deceiver doth not
              deceive you.              The deceivers shall be taken and delivered up
              and like a moth on a garment they shall be crushed.
          2         (c)           Lord, have mercy upon us ! for in thee we have
              placed our trust.                The seed of the rebellious were for destruc-
          3 tion : but thou wast our safety in the time of trouble.                                             At the
              terror of thy voice peoples were confounded ; for fear of thee
              the nations were dispersed.
          4         (p)      Xow your spoils are to be gathered ; the spoils both
              of small and great.                   As if one were gathering: locusts, so will
              they insult you.
          5         (c)      Holy is the God who dwelleth on high,
                    (p)      Was Sion filled with judgment and justice ?
          6         (c)     By law they were to be delivered up ; in treasures is
              our safety.
                    (p) Let there be there wisdom and knowledge and piety
              towards the Lord, (These are the treasures of righteousness ;)
          7 then behold with the dread of you they shall be terrified
              they, of whom you have been afraid, will for fear of you raise
              a grievous cry.                  Messengers will be sent weeping bitterly,
          8 suing for peace.                    For their highways shall be deserted, the
              dread of the nations is at an end and the treaty with them
              broken.         And you will account them common men.
          9         The land mourned ; Lebanon was ashamed ; Saron was be-
              come fens ; Galilee and Channel were bare.
        10          " Now will I arise, saith the Lord, now shall I be glorified
                                                                                                                           ;
        11 now shall I be exalted ; now you shall see : now you shall feel.
                                                                                                                              ;
            Ch. XXXIV.                                       ESAIAS.
                  The strength of your spirit shall be vain ; a fire shall utterly
            12 devour you ; and nations shall be burned up, as thorns in a
            13 field are rejected and burned.                             The far distant nations shall
                  hear what I have done, they who are near shall know ray pow-
            14 er.        The transgressors in Sion are fled ; terror will seize the un-
                  godly.        Who will tell you that a fire is kindled ? who will pro-
            15 claim to you the place which is everlasting ?                                      He who is walk-
                 ing in righteousness, speaking of a straight way ; who hateth
                 iniquity and injustice ; who shaketh his hands from bribes
                 who stoppeth his ears that he may not hear a bloody sentence ;
            16 who shutteth his eyes against the appearance of injustice : he
                 shall dwell in a lofty cavern of a strong rock : bread shall be
                 given him and his water shall not fail.
            17         (p)      You shall see a king with glory ; your eyes shall see a
           18 far distant land ; your soul will meditate on terror.                                          Where are
                 the scribes ?            Where the counsellors ?                      Where is he who num-
            19 bereth them who are fed—the people small and great ?                                                  Alas !
                 they gave no counsel ; nor did they understand him whose
                 voice was so low that a despised people could not hear, and he
                 who heareth hath not knowledge.
           20          (c)      Behold the city Sion is our salvation.                              Thine eyes will
                 look upon Jerusalem.                    It is a rich city composed of tents which
                 should not be shaken; nor should the pins of her tabernacle
                 ever be moved, nor its cords broken.
           21          (p)      Because the name of the Lord is great to you, it shall
                 be to you a place of streams and canals broad and spacious.
                       (c) Thou shalt not pass this way ; nor shall a galley with oars
           22 cross ; for my God is great and will not pass me by.                                            The Lord
                                       the                          chief                                    king—the
                 our judge—                     Lord our                    —the Lord our
                 Lord will himself save us.
           23          (p)      Thy tackling broke, for they had no strength, thy
                 mast gave way.                It will not support the sails, nor rear a stand-
                 ard until it be delivered up for a spoil ; therefore many who
                 are lame will seize the prey : but let not the people who dwell
                 among these say, " I am wearied out " for their sin is forgiven
                 them.
           XXXIV. Sect. 7 ATTEND                                       nations, and hearken ye chiefs.
                 Let the earth hear and the inhabitants thereof—The world and
                                                                                                                                      :;
                XXXIV.                                        ESAIAS.
        Oh.
         2 the people who are therein.                                 Because the wrath of the Lord is
              against all the nations, and his anger against this number of
          3 them to destroy them and deliver them up to slaughter ; there-
              fore their wounded and dead shall be cast out, and the stench
              of them shall ascend; and the mountains shall be drenched
          4 with their blood ; and all the powers of the heavens shall waste
              away ; and the heaven shall be rolled up like a scroll and all the
              stars shall fall like leaves from a vine and as leaves fall from a
              fig tree.
          5          (J)       My sword hath drunk deep in the heaven; behold it
              shall come down on Idumea and on the people justly doomed
              to destruction.
          6          (p)       The sword of the Lord hath been glutted with blood ;
              it    is    pampered with suet—with the blood of he-goats and
              lambs, and with the suet of goats and rams.                                              Because there is
              a sacrifice for the Lord in Bosor, and a great slaughter in Idu-
          7 mea ; therefore the fatlings shall fall with them, namely the
              rams and the bulls.                     And the land shall be drenched with blood,
          8 and glutted with their suet.                                 For it is the day of the Lord's
              vengeance, and the year for a judicial retribution to Sion
          9 and its torrents shall be turned into pitch, and its land into
        10 sulphur.               And its land shall be like pitch burning day and
               night, and which shall not be extinguished : for a long time
              the smoke of it shall ascend.                              During its generation it shall be
        11 desolate.               And for a long period fowls and porcupines, ibises
               and crows shall dwell therein.                              And over it shall be stretched a
               line of devastation ; and in it the onocentaurs shall dwell.                                                     The
        12 chiefs of it shall be no more ; for its kings and its nobles shall
        13 be for destruction.                       And in their cities shall spring up brakes
               and brambles shall be its fortresses : and they shall be cots
         14 for Sirens, and for the ostrich's court.                                              And demons shall
               meet onocentaurs ; and bellow one to the other.                                                          Onocen-
               taurs shall there enjoy repose having found for themselves a
         15 place of rest.                 There the porcupine hath made its nest ; and the
               land hath safely kept its young.                                   There the deer have assem-
         16 bled and seen each other's face.                                     1 counted them and there is
               not one of them lost.                       They have not had occasion to seek each
               other : for the Lord hath issued orders to them ; and his spirit
         17 hath brought them together.                                  And he will himself cast the lots
                                                                        —;
           XXXV. XXXVI.             ESAIAS.
       Oh.
          for them, his hand hath meted the place for them to feed.
          For a long time you shall inherit it.
              (c) For generations of generations let them rest therein.
       XXXV.        Rejoice, O desert ; shout for joy, O thirsty desert
        2 and blossom like a lilly.  Let the deserts of Jordan also bloom
           and rejoice ; to it hath been given the glory of Lebanon and
           the honour of Channel.    And my people shall see the glory
           of the Lord, and the majesty of our God.
        3     Be strong ye hands which are feeble, and ye knees which
        4 are without strength.   Take comfort ye who are faint hearted
           take courage, be not terrified ; behold our G-od retributeth
           judgment ; he will indeed make retribution—he himself will
        5 come and save us.      Then shall be opened the eyes of the
         6 blind ; and the ears of the deaf will hear. Then will the lame
           bound like a hart ; and the stammering tongue will speak plain.
              Because water is burst forth in the desert, and torrents in
         7 a thirsty land ; therefore the glowing sand shall become pools,
           and for the thirsty soil there will be fountains of water.  The
         8 reedy beds and the pools there will be the joy of birds.  There
           will be there a pure highway, which shall be called The Holy
           way.   And the unclean shall not come there ; nor shall there be
           there an unclean way.     But as for the dispersed, they shall
         9 travel it, and shall not be led astray. No lion shall be there ; nor
           shall any ravenous beast come up thither, nor ever be found
           there ; but in it the redeemed will walk, and they who have
           been collected for the Lord.     They indeed shall return and
           come to Sion with joy, and everlasting joy shall crown their
           head : for on their heads will be praise and rapture ; and glad-
           ness shall have full possession of them.   Pain and sorrow and
           sighing are fled.
        XXXVI.        IN the fourteenth year of the reign of Ezekias, Sen-
           nacherim king of the Assyrians came up against the fortified
         2 cities of Judea, and took them.  And the king of the Assyrians
           sent Rabsakes from Lakes to Jerusalem, to king Ezekias,
           with a great army.    And he halted at the canal of the upper
         3 pool in the high way to the fuller's field.And to him went out
           Eliakim the son of Chelkias the steward, and Somnas the
         4 scribe, and Joach son of Asaph the recorder.      And Rabsakes
     Ch. XXXVI.                     ESAIAS.
         said to thein, Tell Ezekias, Thus saith the great king, the king
      5 of the Assyrians, On what hast thou placed confidence ?         Not-
         withstanding negociation and fair speeches, are not preparati-
         ons making for war ?    Now therefore on whom hast thou relied,
      6 that thou rebellest against me ?     Behold thy reliance is on that
         staff—that staff of reed—that broken reed, Egypt; on which
         if a man lean, it will pierce his hand and go through it.      Such
      7 is Pharao king of Egypt to all who rely on him.          But if you
      8 say, " Our confidence is in the Lord our God ; " were you
         now in close connexion with my master the king of the As-
         syrians ; and were I to give you two thousand horses ; could
      9 you put riders on them ?      How then can you revolt and affect
         to be petty princes.    Those are reduced to slavery who have
     10 trusted in the Egyptians for charioteers and cavalry.        Besides,
         are we now come up without the Lord against this land to war
         against it ?  The Lord hath said to me, Go up against this land
         and destroy it.
     11      Then Eliakim and Somnas and Joach said to him, Speak
         to thy servants in Syriac, for we understand it.          Therefore
         speak not to us in the Jewish language.        Why speakest thou
         to the ears of the men on the walls ?
     12      Thereupon Babsakes said to them, Hath my lord sent me
         to your lord or to you to speak these words?         Was it not to
         those men—to them who are stationed on that wall, that they
         may eat dung and drink urine, both they and you together?
     13 Then Babsakes stood and cried with a loud voice in the Jew-
         ish language and said, Hear the words of the great king, the
     14 king of the Assyrians, Thus saith the king, Let not Ezekias
     15 deceive you with speeches.       He cannot deliver you.      ibid let
         not Ezekias say to you, God will deliver you; and this city
         shall not be delivered into the hand of the king of the Assy-
     16 rians.   Hearken not to Ezekias.     Thus saith the king of the As-
         syrians, If you wish to be happy, come out to me ; and eat,
         every one, of his own vine and his own fig trees, and drink water
     17 from your own cisterns, until I come and take you to a land
         like your own—a land of corn and wine, and of bread and
     18 vineyards.    Let not Ezekias deceive you saying, God will de-
         liver you.   Have the gods of the nations, delivered every one
         his own country out of the hand of the king of the Assyrians ?
             VOL. II.                   3 D
      Ch. XXXVIJ.                 ESAIAS.
      19 Where is the God of Emath and Arphath?       And where is the
          God of the city Eppharnim?     Were they able to deliver Sa-
      20 maria ont of my hand?     AVho is there of all the gods of the
          nations who hath delivered his country out of my hand, that
      21 God should deliver Jerusalem out of my hand ?   But they were
          silent and none answered him a word, because the king had
          given a charge that none should answer.
      22     Then Eliakini the son of Chelkias the steward, and Soin-
          nas the secretary at war and Joach the son of Asaph the re-
          corder went to Ezekias with their clothes rent and told him
      XXXVII.        the words of Eabsakes.   And when Ezekias heard
          them he rent his clothes and put on sackcloth and went up to
        2 the house of the Lord.  And he sent Eliakim the steward and
          Somnas the scribe and the elders of the priests clothed with
          sackcloth to Esaias son of Amos the prophet with this message
        3 to him, Thus saith Ezekias, " This day is a day of trouble and
          of reproach and of rebuke and of wrath ; for pangs are come on
          a woman in travail and she hath not strength to bring forth.
        4 That the Lord thy God may attend to the message of Eab-
          sakes which the king of the Assyrians hath sent to reproach
          the Living God ; and refute the words which the Lord thy
          God hath heard, thou shouldst pray to the Lord for these poor
        5 remains."  So when the servants of king Ezekias came to
        6 Esaias he said to them, " Thus shall you say to your lord, Thus
          saith the Lord, Be not terrified at the words which thou hast
          heard ; with which the messengers of the king of the Assy-
        7 rians have reproached me.   Behold I am about to put such a
          spirit in him, that he having heard news will return to his
          own country : and he shall fall by the sword in his own land."
        8    So Eabsakes returned and found the king of the Assy-
          rians besieging Lobna, for he heard that he had removed from
          Lachis; and Thoraka king of the Ethiopians came out to give
        9 him battle.  Upon hearing this, he retreated, and sent messen-
       10 gers to Ezekias, saying, Thus shall you say to Ezekias king
          of Judea, Let not thy God, on whom thou reliest, deceive
          thee, saying, Jerusalem shall not be delivered into the hand of
       11 the king of the Assyrians. Hast thou not heard what the kings
       12 of the Assyrians have done ? How they have destroyed all the
          land ?  And shalt thou be delivered ?Have the gods of the na-
          9                                                                                                       ;
       Ch. XXXVII.                                   ESAIAS.
             tions delivered them whom my ancestors destroyed?                                         Either,
             Goza or Charran or Raphath which are in the country of
        13 Theemath?              Where are the kings of Emath?                         And where those
             of Arphath ?           And where those of the city Eppharuim, of Ana-
             gougana?
        14         When Ezekias received the letter from the messengers
             and had read it, he went np to the house of the Lord; and
        15 having spread it before the Lord, Ezekias prayed to the
        16 Lord, saying, "0 Lord of Hosts the God of Israel, who art
              enthroned on the cherubim !                    Thou alone art the God of every
        17 kingdom of the world.                      Thou hast made the heaven and the
              earth.      Incline,         Lord, thine ear !               Lord, hearken !            Open, O
              Lord, thine eyes !                   Lord, look down and behold the words
              of Sennacherim which he hath sent to reproach the Living
         18 God.         In truth,           Lord, the kings of the Assyrians have laid
              waste this whole inhabited land and the country of those [here
         1    mentioned] and have cast their idols into the fire ; for they
              were not gods ; but works of mens' hands, stocks and stones
         20 therefore they destroyed them.                           But now,             Lord, our God,
              save us out of their hands that every kingdom of the earth
         21 may know, that thou alone art God."                                 Thereupon Esaias son
              of Amos was sent to Ezekias and said to him, Thus saith the
              Lord the God of Israel, " I have heard the prayer which thou hast
              made to me concerning Sennacherim king of the Assyrians.
              This is the word which the Lord hath spoken concerning
               him,
         22         "The virgin daughter of Sion hath despised thee and
               mocked thee ; at thee the daughter of Jerusalem hath shaken
         23 her head ; whom hast thou reproached and provoked? or
               against whom hast thou exalted thy voice, (without lifting up
         24 thine eye to the Holy One of Israel ?)                            That by thy messengers
               thou hast reproached the Lord?                          For thou hast said, By the
               multitude of my chariots, I have ascended the height of moun-
               tains, and to the utmost limits of Libanus, and cut down the
               lofty cedar and beautiful cypress, and entered the stately part
          25 of the forest.             I have laid bridges and dried up waters and
          26 every collection of water."                     "Hast thou not heard those things
               of old which I have done?                      From ancient times I gave com-
               mand and have now pointed out to lay waste nations in stroii g
                                                                                                                   ;
           Ch. XXXYIII.                                 ESAIAS.
           27 places and them Avho dwell in fortified cities.                            I weakened their
                hands and they were dried up, and became like dry grass on
          28 house tops, and like a blasted ear of corn.                                And now 1 know
          29 thy resting place and thy going out and thy coming in.                                       As the
                rage with which thou hast been inflamed, and thy bitterness
          30 are come up to me ; I will therefore put a hook in thy nose and
                a bridle in thy jaws ; and turn thee back by the way in which
                thou earnest."
          31         Now this shall be a sign to thee.                         Eat this year what thou
               hast sown, and in the second year what is left ; but in the third
                year sow ye and reap ; plant vineyards and eat the fruit thereof
          32 for they who are left shall continue in Judea.                              They shall strike
               root downwards and bear fruit upwards.                              For they of Jerusa-
               lem shall be left and they of mount Sion shall be saved.                                       The
          33 zeal of the Lord of Hosts will do this.                               Therefore thus saith
               the Lord, With regard to the king of the Assyrians, he shall
                not enter this city ; nor shoot an arrow against it ; nor present
          34 against it a shield ; nor enclose it with a rampire.                                 But by the
                way which he came, by the same he shall return ; and into this
          35 city he shall not come.                    Thus saith the Lord, I will cover this
                city with my shield to save it for mine own sake and the sake
                of my servant David.
          36         So an angel of the Lord went forth and slew of the camp
               of the Assyrians a hundred and eighty five thousand.                                          And
                when they arose in the morning they found all these dead bo-
          37 dies.        Thereupon Sennacherim king of the Assyrians retreated
          38 and went and dwelt in Ninive. And as he was worshipping, in his
                house, Nasaraeh his ancestor; Adramelech and Sarousar his
                sons smote him with their swords ; and, they having made their
                escape to Armenia, Asardan his son reigned in his stead.
          XXXVIII.                 At that time Ezekias was seized with a mortal
               sickness ;       and Esaias son of Amos, the prophet, came to him
               and said to him, Thus saith the Lord, Give orders respecting
               thy household, for thou art at the point of death and shall not
            2 live.       Thereupon Ezekias turned his face to the wall and pray-
            3 ed to the Lord, saying, "0 Lord, remember how I have
               walked before thee with truth and with an upright heart, and
               have done the things which are pleasing in thy sight."                                        And
            4 Ezekias wept bitterly.                 And a word of the Lord came to Esaias
            5 saying, Go and say to Ezekias, Thus saith the Lord, the
          XXXVIII.                 ESAIAS.
     Oh.
         God of thy father David, I have heard thy prayer and seen
      6 thy tears, Behold I will add to thy term fifteen years.      And I
         will deliver thee and this city out of the hand of the king of
      7 the Assyrians and cover this city with my shield.         And this
         shall be a sign to thee from the Lord, that God will perform
      8 this decree.   Behold I will bring back the shadow of the steps
         the ten steps of the house of thy father, which the sun hath gone
         down. I will bring back the sun those ten steps.    So the sun re-
         ascended the ten steps which the shadow had gone down.
      9 The prayer of Ezekias, king of Judea, when he had been sick,
                      and was orcovered from his sickness.
     10      I said in the height of my days I shall go down to the gates
     11 of Hades, I shall leave the years which remain.      I said, I shall
         no more see the salvation of God in the land of the living ; I
         shall no more see the salvation of Israel on the earth ; I shall
     12 behold man no more.      I am cut off from my generation, I have
         left the remainder of my life.    He is gone and departed from
         me, like one striking a tent, having just pitched it.      My soul
         within me was like a web which the weaver was in act to se-
         ver from the loom.
     13      In that day I was delivered up until morning as to a lion.
         So did he break to pieces all my bones.         For from day to
     14 night I was delivered up.       Like a swallow so let me twitter;
         and like a turtle dove so let me moan ; for mine eyes were too
         weak to look up to the vault of heaven—to the Lord who hath
      16 rescued me and taken from me the sorrow of my soul.        Of this
         indeed thou, O Lord, wast told, and thou hast restored my
      17 breath and I am comforted and live.        For thou hast rescued
         my soul that it should not perish; and hast cast behind thee
      18 all my sins.  For those in the mansion of the dead cannot praise
         thee ; nor can the dead return thee thanks, nor they in Hades
      19 hope for thy kindness.   The living will praise thee even as I do ;
      20 for from this day I shall raise up children, who will proclaim
         this lovingkindness of thine,    God of my salvation ; and I will
         never cease praising thee with a psaltery, all the days of my
         life over against the house of God.
      21     Now Esaias had said to Ezekias, Take a cake of figs and
      22 bruise and apply it as a poultice and thou shalt recover.  Where-
         upon Ezekias said, Let this be a sign to Ezekias, that I shall
         go up to the house of God.
            XXXIX. XL.              ESAIAS.
       Oh.
       XXXIX.        AT the time when Marodach Baladan the son of
           Baladan the king of Babylon sent letters and ambassadors and
        2 presents to Ezekias (for he heard that he had been sick unto
           death and had recovered :) and Ezekias was rejoiced at their ar-
           rival and shewed them the house of Nechotha and that of the sil-
           ver and of the gold ; and that for stacte, and for perfumes and for
           myrrh ; and all the treasure houses and all that he had in his trea-
        3 suries ; there being nothing in his house nor in all his dominion
           which Ezekias did not shew them ; Esaias the prophet then went
           to king Ezekias and said to him, What say those men?       And,
           whence are they come to thee ?     And Ezekias said, They are
        4 come to me from a far distant land, from Babylon.     And Esai-
           as said, What have they seen in thy house ?    To which Ezeki-
           as replied, They have seen all that are in my house.   There is
           nothing in my house which they have not seen : nay, they have
         5 seen also what are in my treasuries.  Thereupon Esaias said to
        6 him, Hear the word of the Lord of hosts !       Behold days are
           coming, when they shall seize all that are in thy house.   And
           all that thy fathers have collected even to this day shall go to
         7 Babylon ; and nothing shall be left behind. Moreover God hath
           said, That of thy children whom thou shalt beget, they will
           take some and make them eunuchs in the house of the king of
        8 the Babylonians.    And Ezekias said to Esaias, Good is the
           word of the Lord wihch he spake : let there be, I pray, peace
           and righteousness in my days.
          XL.     Sec. 1   COMFORT ye, comfort ye my people, saith
         2 God :    priests, speak to the understanding of Jerusalem ; com-
           fort her ; for her humiliation is accomplished ; her iniquity is
           pardoned : for she hath received from the hand of the Lord
           [blessings] double to the punishment of her sins.
         3    A voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare the way
         4 of the Lord ; make straight the roads for our God.    Let every
           valley be filled up, and every mountain and hill be levelled : and
           let all the crooked be made a straight road, and the rough way,
         5 smooth plains : and the glory of the Lord will appear : And all
           flesh shall see the salvation of God.For the Lord hath spoken.
         6     "A voice of one saying, Proclaim."       Wherefore I said,
           What shall I proclaim ?  " All flesh is grass ; and all the glory of
                                                                                                                            ;:
                XL.                                       ESAIAS.
        Ch.
          8 man as a flower of grass.                         The grass is withered and the flower
              fallen ; but the word of our God will endure forever."
          9         Ascend a lofty mountain, thou who proclaimest good news
              to Sion : exalt thy voice with strength, thou who bringest glad
              tidings to Jerusalem : raise it up ; be not afraid ; say to the cities
        10 of Juda, Behold, your God! behold the Lord!                                                The Lord is
              coming with majesty ; and his arm with dominion.                                           Behold his
        11 reward is with him ; and his work, before him.                                             Like a shep-
              herd he will tend his flock ; and with his arm he will gather the
              lambs, and comfort the ewes that are with young.
        12          Who hath measured the water with his hand, and the hea-
              ven with a span and the whole earth with a hand breadth ? Who
              hath weighed the mountains in scales and the dales with a ba-
         13 lance?            Wlio hath known the mind of the Lord? and who hath
         14 been of his counsel to teach him ? or whom hath he consulted that
               he might instruct him? or who hath pointed out judgment to
         15 him? or who hath shewn him the way of knowledge ?                                                If all the
              nations are as a drop from a cask ; and are accounted as the
         16 turning of a balance—may be reckoned as spittle ; if Lebanon is
               not sufficient for a fire, nor all the beasts sufficient for an ho-
         17 mage offering : and all the nations are as nothing and reckoned
         18 as nothing : to whom have you likened the Lord ? and to what
         19 likeness have you compared him?                                    Hath a carpenter when he
               hath made an image, or the goldsmith when he hath melted
         20 gold and gilded it, prepared this as a likeness of him ? for the
               carpenter chuseth a sound piece of timber and will inquire
               wisely, how he may place his image that it may not be moved.
         21 Will you not know ? will you not hear ? hath it not been told
               you from the beginning ? have you not known the foundations
         22 of the earth ?                 He it is, who occupieth the circuit of the earth
               and the inhabitants thereon are as grasshoppers.                                   He it is, who es-
               tablished the heaven as an arch, and spread it out as a tent to
         23 be dwelt in ; who giveth chiefs as a nothingness to govern
         24 and hath made the earth as a mere nothing.                                       For they could not
               plant nor could they sow, nor could their root strike into the
               ground ; he blew upon them and they withered, and a whirlwind
               will sweep them away like stubble.
         25          Now therefore to whom have you likened me ; that I may
         26 be exalted ? said the Holy One.                              Kaise your eyes upwards and
                                                                                                                  ;
                 XLI.                                  ESAIAS.
          Ch.
                take a view : who hath displayed all those ? He who bringeth out
               his host by number can call them all by name.                                On the account
               of abundant glory, by reason of the mightiness of his power
          27 he hath in no wise escaped thy notice ; wherefore, thou, Jacob,
               shouldst not say, yet what hast thou,                             Israel, spoken?            "My
               way is hidden from God " and, " My God hath put off my cause
          28 and is gone."             Hast thou then not known ? hast thou not heard ?
               The everlasting God, the God who fitted up the ends of the
               earth, cannot hunger, nor can he be weary ; nor can his under-
          29 standing be searched out.                      He it is who giveth strength to the
          30 hungry and grief to them who have not had sorrow.                                                For
               youths will hunger and young men be weary, and chosen war-
          31 riors will become strengthless ; but they who wait upon God
               shall have new strength ; they shall put forth fresh feathers
               like eagles ; they shall run and not be wearied ; they shall march
               on and shall not faint.
          XLI.           (J)     Dedicate yourselves to me,                              Islands,      for     the
               Archons will gather new strength.                           Let them draw near and
               confer together, then let them announce judgment.
            2        Who raised up righteousness from the East—called upon
               it to attend his steps ? when he marcheth on, he will exhibit it
               before nations and confound kings and dash their swords to
               the ground, and their bows shall be driven away like stubble.
            3 When he pursueth them, the road for his feet shall pass
            4 through to peace.               Who hath performed and done these things ?
               He who called that righteousness—who from the generations
               of the beginning is calling it—I God the First, and to the suc-
               ceeding ages, THE I AM.
            5        The nations saw and were affrighted ; the ends of the earth
            6 drew near and came together.                          Every one is determining to
               help his neighbour and his brother, and one will say, The
            7 carpenter had strength, so had the smith who beateth with a
               hammer and plateth it.                  Sometimes indeed one will say, " It is
               a beautiful composition ? "                 These things they made strong with
               nails ; they will fix them up that they may not be moved : but
            8 thou Israel my servant ; thou Jacob, whom I have chosen
            9 thou seed of Abraham whom I loved ! have I not taken thee
               from the ends of the earth, and from the speculations thereof
               called thee, and said to thee, Thou art my servant I have cho-
         Oh. XLL                                       ESAIAS.
         10 sen tbee and have not forsaken thee.                             Fear not, for I am with
              thee ; be not led astray, for I am thy God.                            I have strengthened
              thee and helped thee, and secured thee with my just right
         11 hand.         Behold all thine adversaries shall be ashamed and con-
              founded ; for they shall be as nothing and all thine opponents
         12 shall be destroyed.                 Thou mayst seek but thou shalt not find
              the men, who through drunkenness will dare to insult thee.
              For they shall be as mere nothing : and they who war against
         13 thee shall be no more.                     For I am thy God, who have hold
         14 of thy right hand, and who say to thee, Fear not,                                            Jacob,
                   diminutive Israel !               I have helped thee, saith thy God,
        15 who redeemeth thee,                          Israel.       Behold I have made thee
              like the wheels of a wain bruising to pieces a brood of pige-
        16 ons : thou indeed shalt grind mountains and reduce hills to
              small pieces, and make them like dust : and thou shalt win-
             now them ; and a wind shall take them up, and a whirl-
              wind shall sweep them away ; but thou shalt be gladdened
        17 in the sanctuaries of Israel ; and the poor and the needy
             shall      exult with joy : for when they shall seek water and
             there shall be none, and their tongue is parched with thirst ; I
             the Lord their God, I the God of Israel will hear and will not
        18 forsake them ; but will open rivers on the mountains, and foun-
             tains in the midst of plains : I will turn the wilderness into wa-
        19 tery fens, and with streams refresh the thirsty ground.                                       And I
             will plant in the dry wilderness the cedar and box, the myrtle
        20 and cypress and elm : that they may see and know, and consi-
             der and understand at once that the hand of the Lord hath
             done these things; even what the Holy One of Israel hath
             pointed out.
       21         The trial of you is near, saith the Lord God                                   your coun-
                                                                                              ;
       22 cils are nigh at hand, saith the king of Jacob ; let them draw
             near and tell you what will happen, or such things as these be-
             fore they come to pass.                 Tell us that we may apply our under-
             standing, and that we may know the final issue, and the train
       23 of events leading to it.                   Tell us, announce to us the things in
             successive train to the issue ; and we will acknowledge that
            you are gods.            Confer favours and inflict punishments, and we
       24 will pay respect and see at once, that wherever you are thence
            is your operation.
                  VOL. II.                              3 E
             XLIL                           ESAIAS.
        Ch.
                They have chosen you an abomination from the earth ;
        25 but I have raised up that one from the north, and that other
            from the risings of the sun ; they shall be called by my name :
            let the Archons come, and as the clay of the potter—even as a
        26 potter treadeth clay so shall you be trampled down.                  Who now
            can tell these things from the beginning, that we may know,
            even these things before hand : that we may say, The predic-
            tion is true.     There is none who predicteth, nor doth any one
        27 hear your words.         I will first give notice to Sion and I will
       28 comfort Jerusalem           on the way.        For of the nations behold
            there is none, and of the idols none giveth warning.                      And
            should I ask them, Whence are you?                  They could not make
        29 me any answer. For are these they who made you ?                          They
            are indeed those who vainly lead you astray.
        XLIL Sect. 2. (J) JACOB is my servant, I will uphold him,
            Israel is my chosen one, my soul hath embraced him ; I have
            put my spirit upon him ; he will publish judgment to the na-
         2 tions.     He will not scream, nor urge with vehemence : nor
         8 will his voice be heard abroad in the streets.                 A bruised reed
            he will not break, nor extinguish a dimly burning taper ; but
         4 will publish judgment to establish truth.                He will shine out,
            and shall not be broken until he hath established judgment on
            the earth.     In his name therefore let the nations trust.
         5      Thus saith the Lord, the God who made the heaven and fix-
            ed it ; who established the earth and the things therein and who
            giveth vital air to the people on it, and breath to them who tread
         (5 thereon ; I the Lord God have called thee for saving mercy, and
            I will take hold of thy hand and strengthen thee ; for I have
            given thee for the covenant of a race—for the light of nations :
         7 to open the eyes of the blind ; to lead out from chains them who
            are bound, and out of prison, them who are sitting in darkness.
         S I am the Lord God ; this is my name : this glory of mine
            I will not give to another, nor these powers of mine to the
         9 graven idols.       With regard to the former predictions, behold
            they are come to pass ; and these are new things which I
            now declare ; and before their promulgation, they are revealed
            to you.
             —
      Ok. XLII.                    ESAIAS.
      10     (p) Sing to the Lord a new sung, ye, his government ! praise
         his name, ye from the utmost border of the earth, ye who go
         clown on the sea and navigate it, ye islands, and ye who dwell
      11 therein.  Let the desert be glad and the villages thereof; the
         folds for flocks and them who inhabit Kedar: let the inhabi-
         tants of Petra rejoice ; let them shout from the top of the
      12 mountains : to this God let them ascribe glory ; let them pro-
      13 claim his powers among the isles.     The Lord God of Hosts
         will come forth and tread down battle ; he will rouse up his
         zeal, and shout against his enemies with majesty.
      14     (J) I have been silent ; but shall I always keep silence
         and forbear ?  Like a woman in travail I have endured suffer-
      15 ing ; I will strike with astonishment and wither at once. I will
         lay waste mountains and hills, and dry up all the herbage on
      16 them.   I will make rivers islands and dry up pools, and lead
         the blind in a way which they know not, and cause them to
         walk in paths which they have not known.      For them I will
         make the darkness light, and the crooked ways a straight road.
      17 These things 1 will do, and I will not forsake them : but as
         for them they have turned backwards ! be whelmed in shame,
         ye who trust in graven images—who say to the molten images,
         ye are our gods.
      18     (p) Hear,    ye deaf; and ye blind, look up that you may
         see.
      19     (J) Who indeed is blind but my servants ?    And deaf, but
         those who rule over them?    Even the servants of God are be-
      20 come blind.   You have seen again and again but have not re-
         garded : your ears have been opened, but you did not hear.
      21     (p) The Lord God came to a determination, that he might
      22 be justified and might magnify praise.    Whereupon I beheld
         and the people were plundered and dispersed : for the snare
         was every where in the private chambers, and in the houses
         also where they had hidden themselves.   They were for a prey
         and there was no rescuer—for a spoil ; and there was none
      23 who said, Kestore.   Who is there among you who will give
      24 ear to these things ? Attend to those leading causes, for which
         he hath given Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to them who plun-
                          (J) Jehovah, (p) the prophet.
                                                                                                          ;
          Ch. XLIII.                                ESAIAS.
               dered him.         Hath not God, against whoni they sinned, and in
               whose ways they would not walk, and whose law they would
          25 not obey—hath not he brought upon them his fierce anger ?
                    (J) Though war prevailed over them, and they who were
               burning them up were all around, yet they did not, any of them,
          XLIII.           know, nor lay it to heart.             Still however thus saith the
               Lord, the God who made thee                       Jacob, and who formed thee,
                  Israel ! fear not.         Because I have redeemed thee—have call-
           2 ed thee by thy name—thou art mine; therefore when thou
               passest through water, I am with thee, and the streams shall
               not overwhelm thee : and when thou passest through fire,
              thou shalt not be burned up—the flame shall not quite con-
               sume thee.
           3       Because I the Lord thy God, the Holy One of Israel am
               thy Saviour, I have given Egypt for thy ransom and Ethiopia
           4 and Soena in thy stead.                  Because thou hast been precious in
              my sight—hast been honoured and I loved thee ; therefore
           5 I will give men for thee and chiefs for thy life.                       Fear not.        Be-
               cause I am with thee, from the east I will bring thy seed, and
           6 gather thee together from the west : I will say to the north,
               " Give up " and to the south, " Keep thou not back ; bring
               my sons from afar and my daughters from the ends of the
           7 earth—all that are called by my name."                         For I have prepared
           8 him for my glory, I have fashioned him and made him, and
               have brought out a blind people : for their eyes are as if they
               were blind ; and they are deaf, though they have ears.
           9        (p) All the nations were assembled together ; now let all
               the archons be assembled : can any among them announce
               these things ?         Or can any tell you these things before hand ?
               Let them produce their witnesses and be justified, and let them
               hear and tell things true.
          10        (J) Be you witnesses for me : and as for me I myself am
               a witness saith the Lord God ; and this servant of mine whom
               1 have chosen ; that you may know and believe and under-
               stand that with respect to me, The I am, There is no other
          11 God before me ; and after me none will exist.                            I am God and
          12 there is no Saviour besides me.                   I have announced and saved
               I reproached when there was no strange god among you.                                 You
          lo are witnesses for me ; and I the Lord am still the same God
                                                                                                                                        ;
          Ch. XLIV.                                               ESAIAS.
                 from the beginning ; and there is none who can rescue out of
          14 my hands.                   I will act; and who can prevent it—Thus saith
                the Lord, the God who redeemed you, the Holy One of Is-
                rael        For your sakes I will send to Babylon, and rouse up all
                         ;
                who are fleeing; and the Chaldeans shall be bound in ships.
          15 I am the Lord God, your Holy One, who pointed out Israel
                 your king.
          16           Thus saith the Lord who made a highway in a sea, and a path
          17 in the mighty water ; who brought out chariots and horses and a
                mighty host, but they lay down to sleep and shall rise no more :
          18 they were extinguished like an extinguished taper.                                                           Mention
                 not these former things, nor reason from the things of old.                                                       Be-
          19 hold I am in act to do new things, which shall now spring up
                 and you shall know them—I will make a way in the wilderness,
          20 and streams of water in the desert.                                      The wild beasts of the field
                 will bless me—the Seirens and the daughters of the ostrich
                 because I have given water in the wilderness, and flowing
                 streams in the desert, to give drink to this race of mine which
          21 I have chosen—my people whom I have preserved to recount
                 my praises.
          22            I had not now called upon thee, Jacob, nor caused thee
          23 Israel, to weary thyself : thou hadst not brought me thy sheep
                 of thy whole burnt offering; nor honoured me with thine in-
                 cense offerings : I had not burdened thee with sacrifices of
          24 flour ;           nor wearied thee with demands of frankincense : nor
                 hadst thou purchased with silver perfumes for me ; nor had I
                 desired the suet of thy sacrifices: but thou stoodest before
           25 me in thy sins and in thine iniquities.                                           I even I, THE I AM,
                 am he who blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake ;
           26 and of thy sins I will no more make mention : but do thou
                 mention them and let us be judged ; do thou first state thy
                 transgressions, that thou mayst be acquitted.
           27           Your fathers first, then your chiefs transgressed against
           28 me.           When the chiefs polluted my sanctuary, then I gave up
           XLIY.               Jacob to be destroyed, and Israel to reproach.                                           But now,
                 hear,            Jacob my servant, and thou Israel, whom I have cho-
             2 sen ; Thus saith the Lord, the God who made thee, and who
                 formed thee from the womb, still thou shalt be helped.                                                          Fear
                  not, thou my servant Jacob, and thou, beloved Israel, whom
                                                                                                                             ;
                  XLIV.                                      ESAIAS.
           Ch.
            3 I have chosen : for I will give water in their thirst to them who
                are travelling in a desert.                     I will put rny spirit on thy seed, and
            4 my blessings on thy children ; and they shall spring up like
                grass among water, and like a willow by the side of a flowing
             5 stream.          One will say, " I belong to God ; " and another will
                 call himself by the name of Jacob ; and another will write on
                 his hand, " I belong to God ; " and will surname himself by
                 the name of Israel.
             6 Sect. 3.          THUS saith God, the King of Israel, and his Ke-
                 deemer, the God of Hosts, I am the first and I am the last : be-
             7 sides me there is no God.                       Who is like me ?                 Let him stand up
                 and call and announce, and make ready for me : In as much as
                 I have made a man for this age, let them now tell you the
             8 train of events before they come to pass.                                    Hide not yourselves
                 nor be led astray.                  Have you not heard from the beginning ?
                 And have I not told you ?                       You are witnesses whether there be
                 any God besides me.                      And have not then the fashioners and
             9 engravers heard ?                  They are all fools making things to please
           10 their fancies—things which cannot profit them : but shame
                 shall cover these god makers, and all the engravers of these
           11 useless things.                When all by whom they were made are dried
                 up ; then let all the stupid among men be collected and stand
                 together, and let them be confounded and ashamed together :
            12 for the carpenter sharpened an axe, with a hatchet he model-
                 led it ; then he put it into a lathe and with his strong arm fash-
                 ioned it.           Though he be hungry and faint, he must not drink
                 water.
            13         The carpenters having chosen a piece of wood framed it
                 by rule and glued the parts together, and made it in the form
                  of a man and with the comeliness of a man, to set it in a house.
            14 He cut wood from the forest which the Lord planted—a pine
            15 tree, which the rain had nourished, that it might be fuel for the
                  use of man : and having taken some of it he warmed himself
                  and with other pieces they made a fire and baked cakes, and
            16 of the residue they made gods and worshipped them.                                                 Did he
                  not burn half of it in the fire, and, with the coals of that half,
                  bake cakes ; and having roasted meat with it did he not eat and
                  was satisfied ; and when warmed say, " Aha ! I am warmed, I
                                      "                                         —
     Ch. XLIV.                         ESAIAS.
     17 have enjoyed the fire ? "       Yet of the residue he made a carved
         god, and worshippeth it, and prayeth to it, saying, " Deliver
         me, for thou art my God."
     18      They had not sense to think ; for they were so involved in
         darkness that they could not see with their eyes, nor under-
     19 stand with their hearts : nor did any reason in his mind, nor by
         his understanding recollect, that he had burned half of it in the
         fire, and on the coals thereof baked cakes, and had roasted
         flesh and eaten, and of the residue had made an abomination ;
     20 so they bow themselves down to it.              Know thou that their
         heart is ashes, and they are led astray and none can deliver his
         soul.   Take a view of it, will you not say, " There is indeed
         a lie in my right hand ?
      21     Kemember these things,             Jacob, even thou Israel, for
         thou art my servant.       I have made thee my servant ; therefore
      22 O Israel do not thou forget me.           For, lo ! I have made thy
          transgressions vanish like a cloud—and thy sins like the mur-
          ky vapour.    Return to me and I will redeem thee.
      23      (c) Rejoice, O heavens ! because God hath compassionat-
          ed Israel.   Utter sounds of joy, ye foundations of the earth !
          Burst forth into songs, ye mountains and hills, and all ye trees
          which are thereon!       Because God hath redeemed Jacob and
          Israel shall be glorified.
      2-1 Sect.  4.   (J) THUS saith the Lord, who redeemed thee
          even He who formed thee from the womb ; I am the Lord the
          Maker of all things ; I alone stretched out the heavens and
      25 firmly established the earth.         Who else can dispel from the
          heart the signs of belly speakers and divinations ?        I am he who
      26 turneth sages backwards and maketh their counsel foolish ; but
          establisheth the word of his servant, and verifieth the counsel
          of his messengers—who saith to Jerusalem, "Thou shalt be
          inhabited ; " and to the cities of Idumea, " Ye shall be re-
      27 builded, and in its deserts vegetation shall spring up : " Who
          saith to the deep, Thou shalt be wasted, and I will dry up the
      28 rivers : who saith, to Cyrus [I will give] wisdom, and he shall
          execute all my pleasure.         Who saith to Jerusalem, " Thou
                                     (c) the chorus.
            XLY.                       ESAIAS.
        Oh.
           shalt be rebuilded and the house dedicated to me I will found.
       XLV. Thus saith the Lord God, For mine anointed, for Cyrus,
           (whose right hand I have taken hold of that nations may lis-
           ten before him) I will break the power of kings ; I will open
        2 gates before him, and cities shall not be shut up.       I will go be-
           fore thee and level mountains ; I will break in pieces the gates
        3 of brass, and burst asunder the bars of iron ; and give thee trea-
           sures of darkness—deep, hidden, unseen treasures I will dis-
           close to thee, that thou mayst know, that I, the Lord thy God,
           who calleth thee by thy name, am the God of Israel.
        4     For the sake of my servant Jacob, and of Israel my cho-
           sen one, I will call thee by thy name and receive thee kindly.
        5 As for thee, thou didst not know me.        Because I am the Lord
           God and there is no God else besides me ; I strengthened thee
        6 when thou didst not know me ; that they from the risings of
          the sun and they from its goings down may know, that there is
          no God besides me.      I the Lord am God and there is none else.
        7 It was I who provided light and made darkness ; who make
          peace and create evils : I the Lord God am he who doth all
          these things.
        8     (c) Let the heaven above be glad ; and the clouds shower
          down righteousness.      Let the earth spring and bloom with
          mercy and let it cause righteousness to spring up with it.
        9     (J) I the Lord am he who created thee.          Is any thing en-
          dowed with excellence ?     I fashioned it like the clay of a pot-
          ter.  Will the ploughman plough the ground all the day long ?
          Will the clay say to the potter, " What art thou making ?          Or
          the work to the workman, " Thou hast not hands."            Will the
      10 thing formed reply against him who formed it ?          Will one say
          to his father, What wilt thou beget ?      Or to his mother, What
      11 art thou bringing forth ?     Wherefore thus saith the Lord God,
          the Holy One of Israel, even he who made the train of events ;
          Do you question\ me concerning my children ; and concerning
      12 the works of my hands give me directions !        It was I who made
          the earth and man on it : it was I who with my hand establish-
      13 ed the heaven : it was I who gave direction to all the stars.       It
          is I who have raised him up with righteousness to be king ;
          and all his ways shall be straight.    He shall rebuild this city of
          mine, and send back the captives of this my people, not for
          ransom nor reward, said the Lord of Hosts.
      Ch. XLVI.                        ESAIAS.
      14      Thus saitk the Lord of Hosts, That for which Egypt la-
          boured aud the traffick of the Ethiopians, and the Sabeans men
         of tall stature shall come over to thee ; and they shall be thy
         vassals and shall follow thee bound with chains.              They will
         come over to thee and pay thee homage and pray to thee be-
         cause God is in thee.
      15     (c) There is indeed no God besides thee.             For thou art
     16 God and we knew it.         The God of Israel is a Saviour : let all
         that oppose him be ashamed and confounded and in shame let
         them march along.
     1 7     (J) Dedicate     yourselves to me, ye islands !          The Lord
         hath saved Israel with an everlasting salvation.        They shall not
     18 be put to shame nor confounded any more forever.             Thus saith
         the Lord who made the heaven, the same God who displayed
         the earth to view, and who, having made it, parcelled it out : he
         did not make it to be waste, but formed it to be inhabited : I
     19 am the Lord and there is none else.           I have not spoken in se-
         cret nor in an obscure part of the earth.      I have not said to the
         seed of Jacob, Seek ye a vain thing.           I am THE I AM, the
     20 Lord, who speak righteousness and proclaim truth.              Assemble
         yourselves together and come ; consult together ye who escape
         from among the nations.         They are devoid of knowledge, who
          carry the wood—their carved image; and who pray to gods
      2 iwhich cannot save them.        If they will proclaim, let them draw
         near and know at once, who hath published these things from
         the beginning : then let them be announced to you.            I am God
         and there is no other besides me ; a just God and a saviour be-
     22 sides me there is none.       Turn to me and ye shall be saved, ye
         from the farthest part of the earth, I am God and there is none
      23 else.   By myself I swear (righteousness shall proceed from my
         mouth ; my words shall not be reversed) that to me every knee
         shall bow and every tongue shall swear, with respect to God,
     24 saying, Kighteousness and glory shall come to him, and all that
      25 make distinctions among them shall be ashamed.              On account
          of the Lord they shall be acquitted ; and in God all the seed of
          Israel will glory.
      XLVI.        Sect. 5. BEL is fallen ; Nabo is broken to pieces,
          Their graven images were a load for wild beasts and cattle,
              VOL. ii.                  3 F
                                                                                                                                           ;
                    XLYII.                                         ESAIAS.
             Ch.
                   You are carrying them bound like a burden on the weary,
               2 fainty, and hungry, who are all without strength and unable to
                    escape from battle ; and as for them, they are carried away
                    captives !
                3         Hearken to me                        house of Jacob and all ye remnant of
                    Israel, who have been carried from the womb, and instructed
                4 from childhood to old age ; I am the self existent, even till you
                    grow old, I am, I sustain you : I made you and I will bear with
                5 you ; I will lift you up and I will save you.                                          To what have you
                6 likened me ? Look ! Contrive, ye wanderers ! Collecting gold
                    from a bag, and silver by weight they will put it in a balance ;
                    and having hired a goldsmith they made handiworks and
                7 bowing themselves down they will worship them.                                                       They carry
                    it on the shoulder and move on ; but if they set it in its place,
                    there it remaineth.                    It cannot move itself.                       And if any one cry
                    to it, it cannot hear, nor can it save him from evils.
                8          Kemember these things and groan ; reform, ye who have
                9 been led astray : return with the heart and remember the things
              10 of old, that I am G-od and there is none besides me, who can
                     declare events before they happen, as if they were already ac-
                     complished.               When I have spoken, all my counsel shall stand
               11 and all that I have determined, I will effect.                                            Calling from the
                     east a winged fowl, even from a far distant land, for purposes
                     which I have resolved on, I have spoken and brought, I have
                     created and made, I have brought it and made its way pros-
                     perous.
               12           Hear me, ye who have lost understanding—who are far
               13 from righteousness ! I have brought my saving mercy near ; and
                     the salvation which is from me I will not delay.                                              I have placed
                     in Sion salvation for Israel, for a subject of glory.
               XLVII. Come down, sit on the ground,                                                     Virgin daughter of
                      Babylon ! Sit on the ground,                                daughter of the Chaldeans ! for
                 2 thou shalt no more be called tender and delicate ! Take a mill-
                      stone and grind corn.                        Doff thy veil ; uncover thy grey locks.
                  3 Make bare thy leg : wade through rivers.                                           Thy shame shall be
                      exposed ; thy nakedness shall be seen.
                  4         This vengeance I will take on thy account and no more de-
                      liver thee up to men.                        Thy deliverer is the Lord of Hosts, his
                      name is the Holy One of Israel.
                                                                                                                        —!
        Ch. XLVIII.                                       ESAIAS.
           5         Sit    in     compunction : enter into darkness,                                  daughter of
               the Chaldeans ! thou shalt no more be called the strength of a
           6 kingdom. I was angry with my people : thou didst pollute my
               heritage, I delivered them into thy hand : and thou didst shew
               them no mercy.                 The yoke of the aged thou madest very hea-
           7 vy, and saidst, I shall be empress forever.                                      These things did
               not enter thy heart ; nor didst thou call to mind what might at
           8 last befal thee.                 Now, therefore, hear these things, thou vo-
               luptuary !         thou who art seated at ease, who thinkest thyself
               secure ; who sayest in thy heart ; " I am and there is none else.
               I shall not sit a widow, nor shall I know the loss of children."
           9 But now upon thee shall come these two things, suddenly, in one
               day.       The loss of children and widowhood shall come suddenly
               on thee, in the midst of thy sorcery, in the full strength of thy
         10 mighty enchantments. Confiding in thy wickedness thou indeed
               saidst ; " I am and there is none else." Know thou, the consci-
               ousness of these things and thy whoredom shall be thy shame.
         11 Thouindeedsaidst in thy heart, " I am and there is none else " but
                                                                                                                   ;
               upon thee shall come destruction, and thou shalt not know
               a pit ; and into it thou shalt fall. Yes, upon thee shall come mi-
               sery, of which thou shalt not be able to rid thyself : and destruc-
               tion shall come upon thee suddenly of which thou wilt have no
          12 apprehension.                 Persist now in thine incantations and in thy
               manifold sorcery, which thou hast learned from thy youth : if
          13 thou canst be benefited by them.                                  Thou hast wearied thyself
                with thy counsels : let the astrologers now stand up and save
                thee—let them who gaze on the stars tell thee what is instant-
          14 ly coming upon thee.                      Behold like brambles on a fire they shall
               all be burned up ; and shall not deliver their own life from the
                flame.       Seeing thou hast coals of fire, sit upon them ; will they
          15 give thee relief? Thou hast wearied thyselfwith this traffic from
                thy youth.              The men have wandered away, every one to his
                own home ; but for thee there shall be no safety.
          XLVIII.                 Hear these things, ye house of Jacob, ye who are
                called by the name of Israel ! ye who are descendants of Juda
                ye who swear by the name of the Lord God of Israel, making
            2 mention ofit, but not with truth, nor with righteousness ; and who
                stay themselves on the name of this holy city, and rely for sup-
                port on the God of Israel, whose name is the Lord of Hosts.
                                                                                                                    ;
                  XLVIII.                               ESAIAS.
            Oh.
             3        I have already told you former things : when they proceed-
                 ed from my mouth and were published, I did them speedily
             4 and they came to pass.                    I know that thou art of an untractable
                 temper, that thy neck is a sinew of iron and thy brow, brass ;
             5 therefore I told thee beforehand what would come upon thee
                 I published them that thou mightest not say, " The idols have
                 done this to me," nor say, " The graven or molten images have
             6 ordered it for me," you have heard all these things, and did
                 not yourselves know them.                       But now I have made thee hear
             7 new things, which shall hereafter come to pass.                                 Yet hast thou
                 not said, " Things done now and not formerly ! "                                Yes, never in
                 former days didst thou hear these things.                              Thou shouldst not
             8 say, " Indeed I know them."                      Thou didst neither know nor didst
                 thou believe, nor did I from the beginning open thine ear : for
                 I knew that, being in rebellion, thou wilt continue to rebel and
                 wilt still be called a transgressor from the womb.
              9        For mine own name's sake I will shew thee my wrath, and
                 bring upon thee my marvellous things ; that I may not cut thee
            10 off utterly.          Behold I sold thee ; but not for money ; and I have
            11 rescued thee out of the furnace of affliction.                           For mine own sake
                 I will deal with thee ; because my name hath been profaned,
                 and my glory I will not give to another.
            12         Hearken to me,                Jacob ! and thou Israel whom I call.                          I
            13 am the first and am forever.                      My hand hath founded the earth,
                 and my right hand hath established the heaven.                                  Let me sum-
            14 mon them and let them stand together.                              Let them all be assem-
                  bled and listen.          Who hath told them these things ? I who love
                  thee have executed thy will on Babylon, to take away the seed
            15 of the Chaldeans.                I have spoken, I have called, I have brought
            16 him, and have made his way prosperous.                                    Draw near to me
                  and hear these things : from the beginning I have not spoken in
                  secret.      When it was doing I was there.                           And now the Lord
                  Lord hath sent me and his spirit.
            17         Thus saith the Lord who hath redeemed thee, the Holy One
                  of Israel, I am thy God.                I pointed out to thee, how to find the
             18 way in which thou shouldst walk. And hadst thou hearkened to
                  my commandments thy peace would have been like a river
             19 and thy righteousness like a wave of the sea; and thy seed
                  would have been as the sand, and the issue of thy bowels as
                                                                ESAIAS.
         Ch. XLIX.
                the dust of the ground.                        Still however thou shalt not be utterly
         20 cut off; nor shall thy name perish from before me.                                                       Haste out
                                                                                        proclaim the joyful news :
                of Babylon! flee from the Chaldeans :
                and let this be published.                            Proclaim even to the end of the
                earth—Say "The Lord hath delivered his servant Jacob; and
                if they shall thirst (for he will lead them through a desert) a
                rock shall be cleft and water shall gush forth, that my people
         21 may drink." There is no peace, saith the Lord, for the wicked.
         XLIX.                  Sect.       6.    (M) HEABKEN to me,                                         isles ;       and ye
                nations attend                   (After a long time one will stand up saith the
                                            !
                Lord.)
                      From my mother's womb he mentioned my name and
            2 made my mouth like a sharp sword and hid me under the co-
                ver of his hand.                   He made me like a chosen shaft, and in his
            3 quiver kept me concealed, and said to me, " Thou Israel art
            4-  my servant, and by thee I shall be glorified."                                                 Whereupon I
                said, I have laboured in vain ; for vanity and for nought I have
                spent my strength ; therefore my cause is with the Lord ; and
                my labour is before my God.                                   And now thus saith the Lord
                who formed me from the womb.                                      To be his servant to gather
                Jacob to him, and Israel.                           I shall be gathered and glorified be-
            6 fore the Lord.                   And my God will be my strength. Moreover
                he said to me, Is it a great thing for thee to be called my ser-
                vant to re-establish the tribes of Jacob and bring back the dis-
                persion of Israel ? Behold I have given thee for the covenant of
                a race—for the light of nations                               that thou mayst be for salvation
                                                                           ;
                to the farthest part of the earth.
            7          Thus saith the Lord who delivered thee—the God of Isra-
                 el, " Hallow him who despised his life, him who was abhorred
                 by the nations, the slaves of the Archons.                                        Kings shall see him
                and chiefs shall rise up and they shall worship him for the sake
                 of the Lord ; because the Holy One of Israel is faithful, there-
                 fore I have chosen thee.
            8          Thus saith the Lord, " In an acceptable time I have heark-
                 ened to thee, and in a day of salvation helped thee ; and have
                 formed thee and given thee for the covenant of nations that
                 thou mayst reduce the earth to order and possess desolate he-
                                                          (M) The Messiah
                                                                                                                              ;
              Ch. XLIX.                                        ESAIAS.
                9 ritages, saying to them who are in bonds, Go forth ; and to
                    them who are in darkness, " Come into light."                                    In all the high-
                   ways they shall be fed, and there shall be pasture for them in
              10 all the paths.               They shall not hunger nor shall they thirst, nor
                   shall the burning wind nor the sun smite them ; but he who
                   hath compassion on them will comfort them and lead them to
             11 bursting springs of water. And I will make every mountain a
             12 highway, and every path a pasture for them.                                       Behold they from
                   afar shall come, some from the north and the west and others
                   from the land of the Persians."
             13          (c) Kejoice               heavens ; and let the earth be glad, let the
                   mountains resound with bursts of joy ; for God hath compas-
                   sionated his people, and comforted those of his people who
                   were afflicted.
             14          (M)       Hath Sion then said, " The Lord hath quite forsaken
             15 me," and, " Why hath the Lord forgotten me ? " can a wo-
                   man forget her child ? or not have compassion on the offspring
                   of her womb ? Grant that a woman may forget even these, but
             10 I will not forget thee, said the Lord.                                 Behold I have engraven
                   thy walls on my hands ; and thou art continually before me.
             17 And thou shalt be speedily rebuilt by them who destroyed thee
                                                                                                                               ;
             18 and they who laid thee waste shall become thine offspring. Look
                   up with thine eyes all around and view them all ; behold they
                   are gathered together and coming to thee.                                   As I live saith the
                   Lord, Thou shalt clothe thyself with them all, as with rai-
             19 ment, and wrap them about thee as a bride doth her dress.                                                Be-
                   cause thy waste and desolate and ruinated places will now be
                   too narrow for the inhabitants, and they who devoured thee
             20 shall be removed far from thee ; therefore thy sons whom thou
                   hast lost will say in thine ears, This place is too strait for me :
             21 make room for me, where I may dwell.                                       Whereupon thou wilt
                   say in thy heart, Who hath begotten these for me ? I indeed
                   was childless and a widow, Who then hath brought up these
                   for me ? I was abandoned and alone ; whence then have I these ?
             22          Thus saith the Lord, Lord, Behold I will lift up my hand
                   to the nations, and I will erect my standard for the isles.                                          And
                   they shall bring thy sons in their bosoms and carry thy daugh-
             23 ters on their shoulders : and kings shall be thy foster fathers
                   and their queens thy nursing mothers.                                And on the face of the
                                                                          —
     Ch. L.                         ESAIAS.
         ground they shall pay thee homage, and lick the dust of thy
         feet.  And thou shalt know that I am the Lord, and that they
         who wait for me shall not be ashamed.
     24      (a) Can any one take spoils from a giant ?
             (b) And if any one captivate unjustly shall he be safe.
     25 For thus saith the Lord, When one captivateth a giant he shall
         take spoils.
             (a) But can one take from a mighty man and be safe ?
             (b) But it is I who vindicateth thy cause, and I will de-
     26 liver thy children.    And they who afflicted thee shall eat their
         own flesh, and drink like new wine their own blood and be
         made drunk ; and all flesh shall know that it is I the Lord who
         delivered thee.   And who uphold the strength of Israel.
     L.       Thus saith the Lord, Of what sort was the bill of your
         mother's divorce with which I divorced her ?       Or to what cre-
         ditor have I sold you? Behold you were sold for your trans-
         gressions ; and for your iniquities I divorced your mother.
       2 Why, when I came, was there no man? And why, when I
         called, did none answer ?   Is my hand unable to save ? Or have
         I no power to rescue? Behold with my rebuke I can dry up
         the sea, and make the rivers a desert, so that the fishes thereof
       3 shall shrivel for want of water, and die for thirst.   I can clothe
         the heaven with darkness, and make its covering like sack-
         cloth.
       4     The Lord Lord giveth me an instructed tongue, to know
         when it is proper to speak a word.    He gave it me in the morn-
       5 ing ; he gave me in addition an ear to hear.      And the instruc-
         tion of the Lord, Lord openeth mine ears and I am not rebel-
       6 lious, nor do I gainsay.   My back I have given to scourges, and
         my cheeks to be slapped with an open hand, and I turned not
      7 my face from the shame of spittles.      Indeed the Lord Lord was
         my helper; therefore I was not ashamed, but kept my coun-
         tenance firm as a rock.    I knew indeed that I should not be
         confounded, because he who justified me is near at hand.
       8 Who is he that contendeth with me ? Let him stand up with me
         face to face.   Yes, let my accuser, whoever he be, come near
       9 me. Behold the Lord, Lord will be my advocate ; who can do
                    (a) An objectien stated.   (b) The answer.
       Oh. LI.                     ESAIAS.
           me any evil ? Behold you shall all wax old like a mantle, and the
           moth shall consume you.
        10    Who is there among you who feareth the Lord, let him
           hearken to the voice of his servant.Ye who walk in darkness
           and have no light, trust in the name of the Lord and stay your-
       11 selves on G-od. Behold you are all kindling a fire and increas-
           ing the flame ; walk in the light of your fire and by the flame
           which you have kindled.  On my account these things have be-
          fallen you. You shall lie down in sorrow.
       LI.       Hearken to me ye who are in pursuit of righteousness
           and who are seeking the Lord. Look at that hard rock which you
          have been hewing, and into that deep pit which you have dig-
        2 ged.  Look to Abraham your father, and to Sarah who brought
          you forth. For he was an individual when I called him ; and I
        3 blessed him and loved him and multiplied him.    And now
           Sion, I will comfort thee.I have indeed comforted all her de-
           solations, and I will make her waste places like a garden ; and
           those west of her like the garden of the Lord.In her shall be
           found joy and gladness, thanksgiving and the sound of praise.
        I     Hear me ; hear me,  mypeople, and ye kings ; listen to me ;
           for from me shall proceed a law ; and my judgment shall be for
        5 the light of nations.Mydeliverance is approaching speedily, and
           mysalvation shall go forth as light ; and on mine arm nations will
        6 rely. The islands will expect me and on mine arm they will rely.
           Turn up your eyes to heaven ; then look down on the earth
           below ! for the  heaven is like smoke condensed, and the
           earth shall grow old like a garment, and like those things the
           inhabitants shall perish : but my salvation shall endure forever,
           and my saving mercy shall never fail.
        7     Hearken to me, ye who know judgment ; ye people, in
           whose heart is my law.  Fear not the reproach of men, nor be
        8 overcome by their contempt.    For they are like a garment
           which shall be worn out by time, and like woollens which shall
           be devoured by a moth ; but my saving mercy shall endure
           forever, and my salvation to generations of generations.
         9    Awake, awake,    Jerusalem ! and clothe thyself with the
           strength of thine arm.  Awake as at the beginning of day.
        10 Art thou not as the generation of old, which dried up the sea
           —the swelling water of the deep ? Which made the depths of
        11 the sea a road for the delivered and redeemed to pass ? For
       3                                                                      —
      Ch. LII.                        ESAIAS.
          under the guidance of the Lord they shall be brought back,
          and shall come to Sion with joy and everlasting gladness ; for
          praise shall crown their head and joy shall overtake them.
          Grief and sorrow and sighing are fled.
      12      I THE I AM am he who comforteth thee.             Eecollect what
          thou wast when terrified at a mortal man, and at a son of man
      1   who are withered like grass ; and forgottest the G-od who made
          thee—him who made the heaven and founded the earth ; and
          wast every day in continual dread of the furious countenance
          of thine oppressor.   For how did he consult to carry thee away !
      14 But where now is the fury of thine oppressor ?         For when thou
      15 art saved he shall not stand ; nor long continue.       Because 1 thy
          God am he who tempesteth the sea and causeth the billows
      16 thereof to roar ; the Lord of Hosts is my name ; I will put my
          words in thy mouth, and cover thee under the shelter of my
          hand with which I made the heaven and founded the earth ; and
          say to Sion, Thou art my people.
      17      Awake, awake, stand up,            Jerusalem who hast drunk
          from the hand of the Lord the cup of his indignation.        For thou
          hast drunk the cup of horror—the great cup of his wrath ; and
      18 drained it.     And of all thy children which thou didst bring
          forth there was not one who comforted thee, nor was there one
          who took hold of thy hand : no, not of all the sons whom thou
      19 didst raise.   Because these things have befallen thee, who will
          condole with thee ?    Desolation and destruction, famine and the
      20 sword ; who will comfort thee ? Thy sons ? Some are astounded ;
          some asleep at the head of every way, like a parboiled beet ;
          Some are full of the indignation of the Lord, enervated by the
      21 Lord God.      Therefore hear, thou, who hast been humbled, and
      22 who art drunk, but not with wine.           Thus saith the Lord, the
          God who judgeth his people, Behold I have taken out of thy
          hand the cup of horror—the great cup of mine indignation ; and
      23 thou shalt no more drink it again.        And I will put it into the
          hands of them, who have injured thee and oppressed thee
          who have said to thy soul, Crouch down that we may walk
          over thee, when thou hadst bent thy body down level with the
          earth in the street, to them passing along.
      LII.      Sect. 7.   AWAKE, awake,            Sion!   clothe thyself,
          Sion, with thy strength.     Put on thy glory. O Jerusalem, thou
              VOL. II.                   3 G
                                                                                                                 —
                                                         ESAIAS.
           Oh. LIT.
                holy city !         No more shall the uncircuincised and the unclean
             2 pass through thee.                Shake off the dust, and stand up : assume
                 thy seat, O Jerusalem !                Loose the chain from thy neck, O cap-
             3 tive daughter of Sion !                 For thus saith the Lord, You were sold
                for nought ; and you shall be ransomed, not with money.
             4        Thus saith the Lord, My people went down to Egypt at
                 iirst to sojourn there ; and to the Assyrians they were carried
             5 by force.          Now therefore why are you here ?                           Thus saith the
                 Lord, Because my people were taken away for nought, (ex-
                 press your amaze ; and raise the mournful cry ! )
                      Thus saith the Lord, On your account my name is conti-
             6 nualiy reviled among the nations.                            Therefore in that day my
                 people shall know my name. Because I THE I AM, the same
             7 who am speaking, am at hand, like beauty on the mountains
                 like the feet of one proclaiming peace, like one proclaim-
                 ing glad tidings.             Because I will cause thy salvation to be pro-
                 claimed, Saying,               Sion, thy God will reign ; because the voice
             8 of thy watchmen is lifted up ; with the voice therefore let all at
                 the same time express joy.
                      (c) Because eyes will look to eyes when the Lord compas-
             9 sionateth Sion ; let the ruins of Jerusalem break out together
                 with bursts of joy.            Because the Lord hath compassionated her
           10 and delivered Jerusalem; let the Lord therefore make bare his
                 holy arm in the sight of all the nations ! and let all the ends of
                 the earth see the salvation come from our God.
            11        (J) Depart, depart ; come out thence, and touch no pollut-
                 ed thing.        Come out from the midst of her ; be clean, ye who
            12 carry the vessels of the Lord.                       For you shall not come out in
                 haste, nor by flight march along ; for the Lord will march be-
                 fore you in front ; and the God of Israel will bring up your
                 rear.
            13         Behold my servant will mind and be exalted and highly
            14 glorified.          In the same manner as many will be astonished at
                 thee      (so devoid of glory for men will be thine appearance and
                         ;
            15 thy glory for the sons of men) so many nations will ex-
                  press admiration at him ; and kings will shut their mouths, be-
                  cause they, to whom no publication was made concerning him,
                 shall see ; and they, who had not heard, will understand.
                                                                                                                                       ;:
         Oh. MIL LIV.                                            ESAIAS.
         LIII.              (c)         Lord, who bath believed this report of ours, and
           2 to whom hath the arm of the Lord been made manifest ?                                                               We
               have made proclamation as a child before him : as a root in a
               thirsty soil, he hath no appearance nor glory.                                               We have seen
           3 him ; and he hath neither appearance nor beauty : but his ap-
               pearance is mean and defective beyond the sons of men.                                                            Be-
               ing a man in affliction and acquainted with grief, because his
               countenance was dejected, he was despised and disesteemed.
           4 This man beareth away our sins ; and for us he is in sorrow
               And we considered him as being in trouble and under a stroke
           5 and in affliction.                   But he was wounded for our sins, and afflict-
               ed for our iniquities.                     The chastisement of our peace was upon
           6 him ; by his bruises we are healed.                                         We all like sheep had
               strayed ; every man wandered in his way : and the Lord de-
           7 livered him up for our sins : and he, on account of his af-
               fliction, openeth not his mouth.                                 He was led as a sheep to be
               slaughtered.               And as a lamb before its shearer is dumb, so lie
           8 openeth not his mouth.                            In this humiliation his legal trial was
               taken away.               Who will declare his manner of life.
                      (J) Because his life is taken from the earth—for the trans-
           9 gressions of my people he is led to death ; therefore for his fu-
               neral I will give up the wicked, and the rich for his death. Be-
               cause he committed no iniquity, nor practised guile with his
         10 mouth, and the Lord determined to purify him from this
                stroke : when his soul shall be given up for a sin offering ; of
               you he shall see a seed which shall prolong their days.                                                       More-
         11 over it is the determination of the Lord to remove him from the
               trouble of his soul—to shew him light and fashion him for
               knowledge—to justify the Eighteous One who is serving ma-
         12 ny well, when he shall bear away their sins; therefore he shall
                inherit many and divide the spoils of the strong.
                      (p) Because his soul was delivered up to death and he was
                numbered among transgressors and bore away the sins of ma-
                ny and on account of their iniquities was delivered up
         LIV.                 rejoice thou barren, who bearest not—break forth with
                shouts of joy, thou who sufferest not the pangs of child birth ;
               for many more are the children of the desolate than of her who
           2 hath a husband.                      For the Lord said, Enlarge the place of thy
                tent and thy curtains ; fix up ; spare not ; lengthen thy cords
         1
        Ch. LIV.                      ESAIAS.
         3 and make thy stakes strong.     Extend still farther to the right
           and left.  And thy seed shall inherit nations and thou shalt in-
         4 habit wasted cities.   Be not terrified because thou hast been ex-
           posed to shame ; nor blush because thou hast been reproach-
           ed.  For thou shalt forget the shame of ancient times, and the
           reproach of thy widowhood thou shalt remember no more.
         5 For the Lord who is thy maker, whose name is the Lord of
           Hosts—even he who delivered thee, shall be called the God of
           Israel, in the whole earth.
         6     The Lord hath not called thee as a wife forsaken and dis-
           consolate ; nor as a wife that hath been hated from her youth.
         7 Thy God hath said, " I left thee for a little while ; but with
         8 great mercy I will compassionate thee : in a short wrath I
           turned away my face from thee ; but with everlasting kindness
           I will have mercy on thee."        The Lord who delivered thee
         9 hath said, "From the flood which was in Noah's time this is
           my purpose—as I solemnly promised him at that time that I
        10 would no more be angry with the earth on thine account, nor
           in rebuking thee overturn the mountains ; and that thy hills
           should no more be moved ; so my kindness for thee shall not
           fail, nor shall the covenant of thy peace ever be changed : for
            he said for thee, Be appeased,    Lord."
        1      (J)    thou afflicted and storm beaten ! art thou not com-
            forted ?  Behold I am preparing for thee carbuncles for thy
        12 building stones, and the sapphire for thy foundations ; and for
           thy battlements I will lay jasper; and crystal, for thy gates;
        13 and for thy circumambient walls, precious stones: even thy
            sons, all instructed of God ; and thy children in great pros-
        14 perity.   And with righteousness thou shalt be rebuilded.       Ab-
            stain from injustice and thou shalt not be affrighted ; and as for
        15 terror, it shall not approach thee.   Behold proselytes shall come
            to thee for my sake ; and they shall sojourn with thee and fly to
        1G thee.   Behold I have created thee, not like a coppersmith blow-
           ing coals and using a tool for the work.        But I have created
        17 thee, not for destruction.   Perish every weapon formed against
            thee !  I will not prosper it.  Though every voice should rise up
            against thee for judgment, thou shalt overcome them all and in
            the trial they shall be condemned.     There is an inheritance for
            them who serve the Lord, therefore you are to be just for me.
            saith the Lord.
                                                                                                                                                       :
           Ch. LV.               LVI.                                   ESAIAS.
           LY.          Sect.         8.       HO! ye who are thirsting, come to water ! and
                  ye who have no money, come buy and eat, without money
             2 and without price, wine and the choicest bread.                                                                       Why are
                  you expending money and labour for that which will not sa-
                  tisfy ?         Hearken to me and you shall eat good things ; and your
             3 soul will be regaled with delicacies.                                                   Incline your ears and
                  follow in my paths ; hearken to me and your soul shall live
                  on good things ; and I will make with you an everlasting co-
                  venant—the gracious promises to David which are faithful.
             4 Behold for a testimony to nations I gave him, a chief and a
             5 lawgiver to nations.                             Nations which knew thee not will fly to
                  thee, for the sake of the Lord thy God, the Holy One of
                  Israel, because he hath glorified thee.
             6           Seek ye the Lord ; and when you find him call upon him.
             7 And when he draweth near to you ; let the wicked man for-
                  sake his ways, and the unrighteous man his counsels, and turn
                  to the Lord and he shall find mercy ; for he will abundantly
             8 pardon your sins.                            For my counsels are not as your counsels
             9 nor are my ways as your ways, saith the Lord.                                                                   But distant
                  as the heaven is from the earth, so is my way distant from
           10 your ways ; and your thoughts from my understanding.                                                                              For
                  as the rain when it descendeth, or snow, from the heavens,
                  dotli not return thither, till it hath watered the earth, and caused
                  it    to generate and bloom and yield seed for the sower and
           11 bread for food ; so shall it be with my word : when it hath
                  proceeded from my mouth, it shall not be reversed, till all
                  are accomplished which I willed ; and till I prosper thy ways
           12 and my commandments.                                       For with gladness you shall go forth ;
                  and with joyfulness you shall be taught : for the mountains
                  and hills shall leap for joy, expecting you ; and all the trees
           13 of the field will clap with their branches.                                                      And instead of the
                  briar, shall spring up the cypress ; and instead of the thistle,
                  shall come up the myrtle.                                 And the Lord shall be for a name,
                  and for an everlasting sign which shall not fail.
          LYI.                 Thus saith the Lord, Keep judgment and practise right-
                  eousness ;             for my salvation is near, just ready to come, and
             2 my saving kindness to be revealed.                                               Happy the man who doth
                  these things and the mortal who adhereth to them ; and who
                                  —                                                                                                     ;
                                                                  ESAIAS.
             Oh. LVII.
                    is careful not to profane my sabbaths, and who restraineth his
                    hands from doing evil.
               3          Let not the stranger who cleaveth to the Lord say, "The
                    Lord will separate me from his people."                                         Nor let the eunuch
               4 say " I am a dry tree." For thus saith the Lord to the eunuchs,
                    Whoever of them shall keep my sabbaths, and chuse the things
               5 in which I delight and adhere to my covenant ; I will give
                   them, in my house and within my walls, an honourable place
                   better than sons and daughters—I will give them an ever-
               6 lasting name which shall not fail.                                        And with regard to the
                   strangers who cleave to the Lord to serve him, and love the
                    name of the Lord—to be his man servants and maid servants,
                    even all who are careful not to profane my sabbaths and who
               7 adhere to my covenant ; them I will bring to my holy moun-
                    tain and make them joyful in my house of prayer ; their burnt
                    offerings, and their sacrifices shall be acceptable on mine altar
                    for my house shall be called a house of prayer for all the
                    nations.
               8 Sect.          9.      THE LORD who gathereth the dispersed of Israel
                9 said, Because I will gather a congregation for him, O all ye
              I     beasts of the field come !                           all ye beasts of the forests, devour !
                    you see that they are all blind ; that they have not knowledge.
                    They are dumb dogs, they cannot bark : they are asleep in
              I I   bed, they love to slumber : yet these dogs are of untamed
                    appetite ; they can never have enough.                                       They are indeed mis-
                    chievous, they have no consideration.                                     They all followed their
                    own courses, every one according to his own purpose.                                                          You
              LVII.              see how a righteous one was destroyed, and no one
                    layeth it to heart.                   And righteous men are taken away, and no
                    one observeth, that on account of iniquity the righteous one
                2 was taken away. His sepulture shall be in peace.                                                  He is taken
                    from among you.
                3          But as for you, draw near hither, ye lawless sons ! ye seed
                4 of adulterers and of fornication ! in what have you indulged
                    yourselves ? and at whom have you opened your mouth, and at
                    whom lolled your tongue? are you not children of destruction
                5 —a lawless race ? invoking idols under shady trees, slaying
                6 your children in the valleys among the rocks ?                                                 This shall be
           1
        Ch. LVIL                                              ESAIAS.
              thy portion—this thy lot—as thou hast poured out libations to
              them and to them offered up sacrifices, shall I not for these
          7 things be incensed ?                         On a high and lofty mountain thou hast
          8 made thy bed, and caused thy sacrifice to ascend thither ; and
              behind the posts of thy doors thou hast set up thy memorial.
              Didst thou think, that, if thou departedst from me, thou
              shouldst have something more ?                                  Thou hast loved them who lay
          9 with thee and multiplied thy fornication with them, and hast
              done it with many who are far from thee ; and hast sent ambas-
              sadors beyond thy borders ; and humbled thyselfeven to Hades ;
        10 With thy long journies thou hast wearied thyself and hast not
               said, I will take some rest.                           Because in thy full strength thou
              hast done this ; therefore thou shouldst not supplicate me.
        1            Of whom hast thou been so anxiously afraid that thou hast
               dealt falsely with me, and has not remembered nor taken me
               into thy thoughts, nor into thy heart ?                                        AVhen I saw and ne-
        12 glected thee thou didst not fear me.                                           Now I will declare my
               righteousness and thine evil deeds which shall not avail thee.
         lo When thou criest ; let them deliver thee in thine affliction.                                                           A
               wind indeed shall overtake them all ; and a whirlwind shall
               sweep them away.                       But they who adhere to me shall possess
        14 the land, and inherit my holy mountain.                                                 And they will say.
               Clear the ways before him, remove obstructions out of the road
               of my people.
        15            Tlim saith the Most High, who on earth inhabiteth eterni-
               ty,     who is Holy among holies ; whose name is THE MOST
               HIGH; who at rest in the holies giveth patience to the humble,
        16 and life to them who are of a contrite heart ; I will not contend
              with you forever, nor will I be continually angry with you, for
              from me spirit is to proceed and I have made every breathing
         17 soul.           Because of sin I grieved him a little while and smote
               him and turned away my face from him ; and he was grieved
        18 and went his ways sorrowing ; T have seen his ways and healed
        19 him, and comforted him, and given him true consolation                                                            peace
                                                                                                                         ;
               upon peace to them near and to them far off. So the Lord said,
        20 I will heal them.                          But the wicked shall be tossed like waves
        21 and shall not be able to rest.                                  There is no peace, said God, to
               the wicked.
                                                                                                                                             ;:
                       LVTTI.                                       ESAIAS.
              Oh.
              LYIIL                 Sect. 10.           (J)       CKY aloud and spare not ; raise thy
                     voice like a trumpet : proclaim to my people their sins, and to
                 2 the house of Jacob their iniquities.                                     Day after day they seek
                     me, and desire to know my ways ; like a people who have prac-
                     tised righteousness, and who have not forsaken the ordinance
                     of God.          They now ask of me a just decision and desire to draw
                 3 near to God.                  Saying, " Why have we fasted and thou hast not
                     seen ?         We have humbled our souls and thou hast not known."
                     In the very days of your fasts you enjoy your own pleasures
                 4 and goad all them who are under your controul.                                                    You fast for
                     strife and debate ; and smite the poor with your fists. Why fast
                     ye for me as to-day that by a cry your voice may be heard?
                 5 This is not such a fast as I have chosen, that a man should af-
                     flict his soul for a day.                         No: though thou shouldst bend thy
                     neck like a hook and lay sackcloth and ashes under thee : even
                     in that case you are not to call it an acceptable fast.
                 6          It is not such a fast as this that I have chosen, saith the
                      Lord.         But loose every bond of iniquity; dissolve the obliga-
                      tions of onerous contracts ; set at liberty them who are oppress-
                 7 ed, and tear in pieces every unjust stipulation in writing : deal
                      out thy bread to the hungry, and take into thy house the poor
                      who have no shelter ; if thou seest one naked, clothe him, and
                  8 look not scornfully on dependants of thy race ; then shall thy
                      light break forth like the morning, and thy remedies shall
                      spring up speedily : and thy righteousness shall go before thee,
                  9 and the glory of the Lord will surround thee.                                              Then thou shalt
                      cry and God will answer thee ; and whilst thou art speaking he
                      will say, Lo I am here.
                             If thou remove from thee the bond, and the vote and de-
                10 cree which occasion murmuring, and from thy soul give bread
                      to the hungry and satisfy an afflicted soul ; then shall thy light
                      spring up in darkness; and thy darkness shall be as the noon
                                 and thy God will be with thee continually ; and thou shalt
                11 day :
                      be satisfied as thy soul desireth ; and thy bones shall be made
                      fat and be like a watered garden, and like a spring whose water
                12 never failed.                   And thine old waste places shall be rebuilded
                      and thy foundations shall last for generations of generations
                       and thou shalt be called the repairer of breaches, and shalt en-
                      joy rest in the midst of thy paths.
                                                                                                                          :
              LIX.                                      ESAIAS.
       Ch.
       13          If on account of the sabbaths thou restrain thy foot from
             doing thy pleasure on that holy day ; and call the sabbaths de-
             lightful, dedicated to God ; and wilt not lift up thy foot for any
       14 work ; nor utter a word in anger from thy mouth ; and trust
             continually in the Lord ; he will then mount thee on the good
             places of the land and feed thee on the inheritance of thy~fa-
             ther Jacob : for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken these
             words.
       LIX.             It is not that the hand of the Lord is unable to save ; nor
         2 that his ear is grown dull to hear ; but your sins make a sepa-
             ration between you and your God ; and on account of your
             sins he hath turned away his face from you that he may not ex-
         3 ercise compassion.                   For your hands are polluted with blood,
             and your fingers with sins; your lips have spoken iniquity,
         4 and your tongue contriveth injustice.                                       None speaketh just
             things, nor is there any just judgment.                                 They trusted in vani-
             ties and they speak lies.                    Because they hatch mischief, therefore
         5 they bring forth iniquity.                        They hatched the eggs of asps, and
             are weaving a spider's web ; and he who was about to eat some
             of their eggs, upon breaking one that was hatched found there-
         6 in a viper.               Their web will not serve for a mantle, nor can
             they clothe themselves with their works; for their works are
         7 works of iniquity.                   Their feet are running to evil ; they are
             swift to shed blood.                  And their reasonings are reasonings for
         8 murders.            Destruction and misery are in their ways, and the
             path of peace they do not know, nor is there any judgment in
             their ways ; for the paths which they travel are crooked and
         9 peace they do not know.                        Therefore judgment is far from them,
             and saving mercy shall not overtake them.                                        When they were
             waiting for light, darkness came upon them, expecting a
       10 blaze of light they walked in obscurity.                                    They shall grope like
             blind men for a wall and feel about like men who have no eyes,
       11 and fall at mid-day as at midnight.                                      When dying they will
             groan like a bear and mourn like a dove ; and at their departing
             say, " We waited for judgment and there is none : and as for
       12 safety, it is far from us.                         For our manifold iniquity is before
             thee ; and our sins are risen up against us : for our iniquities
       13 are in us, and we know our transgressions.                                        We have sinned
             we have lied, and turned back from following our God ; we
                   VOL. II.                                     3 H
                                                                  —
       Ch. LX.                   ESAIAS.
       14 have spoken things unjust, and have been disobedient ; we
          have conceived and meditated from our heart lying words,
          we have indeed turned judgment backward, therefore saving
          mercy standeth aloof."
             (p)  Because truth was destroyed in their ways and; they
       15 could not walk in straight paths ; and truth was removed and
          they substituted opinion in place of knowledge, therefore the
          Lord took a view, and it displeased him that there was no judg-
       16 ment.  When he took a view and there was no man ; and made
          close observation, and there was no helper ; then with his own
       17 arm he defended them and with mercy supported them.   And
          he put on righteousness as a breast plate, and placed on his
          head the helmet of salvation, and threw around him the mantle
       18 of vengeance ; and his cloak, as about to retribute retribution
          reproach to his adversaries : and they from the west shall re-
       19 vere the name of the Lord ; and they from the rising of the
          sun, his glorious name.For he will come like an impetuous
       20 stream—for the wrath of the Lord will come with fury. For
          the sake of Sion the Deliverer will come, and turn away un-
       21 godliness from Jacob.  And this shall be my covenant with
          them, said the Lord, this spirit of mine which is upon thee, and
          these words which I have put in thy mouth shall not fail from
          thy mouth, nor from the mouth of thy seed, (for the Lord hath
          spoken) from this time forth forever.
       LX.     Sect. 11.  BE ENLIGHTENED: be enlightened,
          Jerusalem ! for thy light is come ; and the glory of the Lord is
          risen upon thee.  Behold darkness will cover the earth and
          thick darkness the nations : but upon thee the Lord will shine
          and his glory over thee will be conspicuous.And kings will
          walk by thy light : and nations by thy splendour.
        4     Baise thine eyes around and behold thy children gathered
           together ; all thy sons are come from afar, and thy daughters
         5 shall be carried on shoulders.Then thou wilt look and be fill-
           ed with awe and astonished at heart ; because the riches of the
         6 sea and of nations and peoples will pour in upon thee.And for
           thee will come herds of camels and those of Madiam and
           Gaipha will cover thee, and those of Saba will come bringing
           gold and will also bring frankincense, and with joy proclaim
         7 the salvation of the Lord.And all the flocks of Kedar shall be
                                                                           !                                              ; ;
         Ch. LX.                                           ESAIAS.
               gathered together ; and the rams of Nabaioth will come ; and
               acceptable offerings will be made on mine altar, and my house
               of prayer will be glorified.
           8         (c) Who are those ?                    They are flying like clouds, and like
               doves with their young towards me
           9         (J) For me the islands waited, and among the first the
               ships of Tarsis to bring thy children from afar and their silver
               and their gold with them.                        And because of the holy name of
               the Lord, and because the Holy One of Israel is glorious
         10 therefore strangers shall rebuild thy walls and their kings shall
               wait upon thee.               For on account of my wrath I smote thee, but
         11 for mercy's sake I have loved thee ; and thy gates shall be open
              continually (by day or by night they shall not be shut) to in-
              troduce to thee the wealth of nations and their kings pompous-
         12 ly attended.               For the nations and kings which will not serve
              thee shall perish—such nations indeed shall be utterly laid
              waste.
        13          The glory of Lebanon also shall come to thee, with the
              cypress and the pine and the cedar, to adorn the place which
        14 is dedicated to me.                     And to thee shall come trembling the sons
              of them who afflicted and humbled thee, and thou shalt be
              called, City Sion of the Holy one of Israel.
        15          Because of thy having been forsaken and hated when there
              was no helper, I will make thee an everlasting boast—a joy for
        16 perpetual generations.                        And thou shalt suck the milk of na-
              tions, and feed on the wealth of kings, and shalt know that I
              the Lord am thy Saviour, and that thy Eedeemer is the God
        17 of Israel.            And instead of brass I will bring thee gold ; and in-
              stead of iron I will bring thee silver ; and instead of wood I will
              bring thee brass and instead of stones iron.                                    And I will make
         18 thy chiefs peaceful and thine overseers righteous ; and violence
              shall no more be heard in thy land, nor destruction nor misery
              in thy borders ; but thy walls shall be called Salvation and thy
        19 gates, sculpture.                  And thou shalt no more have the sun for a
              light by day nor shall the rising of the moon enlighten thy
              night; but the Lord will be to thee an everlasting light; and thy
        20 Godwillbe thy glory. For thy sun shall not go down nor shall thy
              mooneverwane: Forthe Lord will beto thee an everlasting light
        21 and the days of thy mourning shall be ended.                                             And thy peo-
                   LXII.             ESAIAS.
        Ch. LXL
           pie shall be all righteous, they shall inherit the land forever,
        22 preserving the plant, the works of their hands, for glory. The
           fewest in number shall become thousands, and he who is
           smallest, a great nation.  I the Lord in due time will gather
           them.
        LXI.   Sect. 12.  (M) THE SPIKIT of the Lord is upon me,
           for the business for which he anointed me.  He hath sent me to
           publish glad tidings to the poor, to heal them who are broken
           hearted ; to proclaim a deliverance to captives, and a recovery
         2 of sight to the blind : to proclaim an acceptable year of the
           Lord and a day of retribution.   To comfort all who are mourn-
         3 ing ; that to the mourners in Sion may be given, glory instead
           of ashes, oil of joy to the mourners, robes of praise for the
           spirit of heaviness; that they may be called generations of
         4 righteousness, a plant of the Lord for glory.   And the wastes
           of old times shall be rebuilded; and former desolations shall
           be repaired, and wasted cities renewed which had lain in ru-
         5 ins for ages. And strangers shall come and feed thy flocks and
         6 foreigners shall be thy ploughmen and vine dressers.   But you
           shall be called priests of the Lord, ministers of God.     You
           shall eat the wealth of nations and for their riches be admired.
         7 Thus shall they again inherit the land ; and everlasting joy shall
         8 be on their head.   For I am the Lord who love righteousness
           and hate the spoils of injustice ; and I will give the righteous
           the fruit of their toil and make an everlasting covenant with
         9 them and their seed shall be distinguished among the nations?
           and their offspring in the midst of peoples.    Every one who
           seeth them will know them, that they are a seed whom God
        10 hath blessed.  And they shall rejoice in the Lord with joy.
               (c) Kejoice in the Lord,     my soul, for he hath clothed
           me with the mantle of Salvation, and with an under garment
           of gladness, he hath crowned me as a bridegroom with a crown
        11 and adorned me as a bride, with jewels, and like the earth
           blooming with flowers.   And as a garden causeth its seeds to
           vegetate, so will the Lord cause righteousness to spring up
           and joy in the presence of all nations.
        LXII.     (M) For Sion's sake I will not be silent, and for the
           sake of Jerusalem I will not rest ; until the righteousness thereof
      Ch. LXIII.                   ESAIA8.
       2 break forth as light, and my salvation blaze like a torch ; and na-
         tions see thy righteousness, and kings this glory of thine.
         When he shall call thee by a new name which the Lord hinr
       3 self will give thee ; then thou shalt be a crown of beauty in the
         hand of the Lord, and a royal diadem in the hand of thy God.
       4 And thou shalt no more be called, Forsaken; nor shall thy
         land any more be called, The desert; but thy name shall be
         called My delight; and that of thy country, The inhabited
         land.  Because the Lord is well pleased with thee therefore thy
       5 land shall be thickly inhabited : and as a youth cohabiting
         with a virgin bride, so shall thy sons inhabit it : and 'as a
         bridegroom will rejoice in his bride, so will the Lord rejoice
         over thee.
       6     Now upon thy walls,        Jerusalem, I have set watchmen
         all the day ; and all the night, they will not cease continually
       7 to mention the Lord ; for there is none like you.      When he
         shall have re-established and made Jerusalem a boast on the
       8 earth—the Lord hath sworn by his glory and by the power of
         his arm, I will no more give thy corn and thy food to thine ene-
         mies ; nor shall the sons of strangers any more drink thy wine,
       9 for which thou hast laboured.     But they who reap the harvest
         shall eat and praise the Lord ; and they who gather the vintage
      10 shall drink wine in my holy courts.    Go through my gates and
         prepare the way for my people and throw the stones out of the
      11 way.   Erect a standard for the nations.  For lo ! the Lord hath
         published this to the end of the earth.   Say to the daughter of
         Sion, Behold the Saviour is come for thee, having his own re-
      12 ward and his work before him.      And he will call this a holy
         people, redeemed by the Lord ; and thou shalt be called the
         city sought and not forsaken.
      LXIII.      (c) Who is this who is coming from Edom ?         What
         redness of mantles from Bosor !   He so magnificent in apparel ?
         He marcheth with majesty !
       2       (M) I proclaim righteousness and the judgment of sal-
         vation.
             (c) Why are thy garments red and thy clothing, as from
         a trodden wine-vat ?
       3     (M) I am full of a country trodden down ; and of the na-
         tions there is not a man with me.     I have trodden them down
                                                                                                           ;
                LXIII.                              ESAIAS.
          Oh.
               in my wrath, and crumbled them like dust and shed their
            4 blood on the earth.            For the day of retribution came upon them
            5 and the year of redemption is at hand.                          When I looked and
               there was no helper and observed that none upheld ; then mine
               own arm delivered them.                 Mine indignation indeed was rous-
            6 ed, and I trampled them down in mine anger and shed their
               blood on the earth.                                kindness of the Lord—the
            7       (c) I recollected the loving
               mercies of the Lord in all those things which he retributeth
               for us.     The Lord is a good judge to the house of Israel.                            He
            8 dealeth with us according to his tender mercy and according
               to the abundance of his saving goodness, and said, "Is not
            9 this my people?             Children should not rebel."                And he became
               their Saviour from all their distress.
                    It was not an ambassador nor a messenger; but he himself
               saved them.         Through his love and his indulgence to them, he
               himself redeemed them and took them up, and exalted them
           10 all the days of old.             But they rebelled and provoked his holy
               spirit ; so he became their enemy.                     He fought against them
               though he remembered the days of old.
           11        0! where is he who caused the shepherd of his flock to
                come up out of the sea?                 Where is he, who put his holy spi-
           12 rit in them ?           That glorious arm of his which led Moses by
                the right hand?            He forced back the water from before him,
           13 to make himself an everlasting name.                          He led them through
                the deep, like a horse through a desert ; and they were not
           14 fatigued : and like cattle through a plain.                         A spirit from the
                Lord descended and conducted them.                          Thus thou .didst lead
           15 this people of thine, to make thyself a glorious name.                              Eeturn
                from heaven and take a view from the house of thy sanctuary
                and thy glory.          Where is thy zeal and thy majesty?                        Where
                the abundance of thy loving kindness and tender affections,
                that thou hast withdrawn thyself from us ?                          For thou art our
           16 father.        Because Abraham knoweth us not, and Israel hath not
                acknowledged us ; do thou,                      Lord, our father, do thou de-
           17 liver us.        From the beginning thy name is upon us; why, O
                Lord hast thou suffered us to wander from thy way, and our
                hearts to be hardened so as not to fear thee?                          Keturn for the
                 sake of thy servants—for the sake of the tribes of thy heritage,
          LXIV. LXV.                ESAIAS.
     Ch.
     18 that we may inherit a little of thy holy mountain.       We are be-
     19 come as at the beginning, when thou didst not rule over us,
         and when we were not called by thy name.
     LXIV.        If thou wilt open the heaven, at thy presence terror
       2 will seize the mountains, and they will melt as wax melteth
         before fire ; and a fire will burn up the adversaries, and thy
         name will be manifest to the adversaries—At thy presence
       3 the nations will be troubled.      When thou executest thy glo-
         rious works, because of thee terror will seize the mountains.
       4 Never have we heard, nor have our eyes seen a God be-
         sides thee ; nor works such as thine, which thou wilt do for
       5 them who wait for mercy.        For it will meet them who prac-
         tise righteousness, and they will remember their ways.       Behold
       6 thou wast angry when we sinned ; because of this we wan-
         dered and became all of us as unclean, and all our righteous-
         ness was like a polluted rag; and for our iniquities we have
       7 fallen like leaves ; so that the wind will sweep us away.     There
         is indeed none who invoketh thy name, or who remembered
         to lay hold on thee ; because thou hast turned away thy face
         from us, and delivered us uvj for our sins.
       8     But now,     Lord, thou art our father.    Though we are clay,
       9 we are all the works of thy hands : be not angry with us to the ut-
         termost ; nor remember forever our sins : but, 0, look down
      10 now upon us ; for we are all thy people.     The city of thy sanc-
         tuary is become a desert : Sion is become like a desert ; Je-
      ll rusalem, for a curse.     The house, our sanctuary—even that
         glory which our fathers blessed, is utterly burnt up with fire,
      12 and all our glorious things are in ruins ; yet for all these things,
         thou,     Lord, hast refrained, and been silent.         Thou hast
         humbled us exceedingly.
      LXV. (M) I became manifest to them who inquired not for
         me; I was found by them who sought me not.             I said, " Be-
         hold here I am " to the nation which did not invoke my name.
       2 I stretched out my hands all the day long to a disobedient and
         gainsaying people, who were walking not in a good way, but
       3 following their own sins.     This people are provoking me con-
         tinually to my face.     They will sacrifice in the gardens and
         burn incense on the tiles, to demons which have not an ex-
       4 istence.   They sleep in tombs and in caverns for the purpose
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ;;;
                                  Oh. LXV,                                                                                                                               ESAIAS.
                                                  of dreaming : they eat swine's flesh, and the broth of sacri-
                                       5 fices ; all their vessels are polluted                                                                                                                                                   yet they say, "Keep at a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ;
                                                  distance from me ; come not near me, for I am clean."                                                                                                                                                                                                                     This is
                                                  a smoke which causeth my wrath ; a fire is kindled by it every
                                       6 day.                                   Behold it is written before me : I will not keep silence,
                                                  until I have retributed into their bosom their sins ; and the
                                        7 sins of their fathers, saith the Lord.                                                                                                                                                   They have burned incense
                                                  on the mounts, and treated me with scorn on the hills, I will
                                                  retribute their works into their bosom.
                                   .   8                          Thus saith the Lord, as when a good grape is found in
                                                  the cluster, they will say, " Destroy it not ; for there is a bless-
                                                  ing in it," so will I do for the sake of him who serveth me
                                       9 for his sake I will not destroy them all.                                                                                                                                                                                I will indeed bring
                                                  forth the seed from Jacob namely, from Juda, and he shall
                                                  inherit my holy mountain : and my chosen ones and my ser-
                                  10 vants shall inherit and dwell there ; and there shall be in the
                                                  forest folds for flocks ; and the valley of Achor shall be a rest-
                                  11 ing place of herds, for my people who have sought me.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 But
                                                  as for you, who forsake me and forget my holy mountain,
                                                  and who prepare a table for the Demon, and fill up a mixed
                                  12 potion for Fortune, you I will deliver up to the sword ; you shall
                                                  all bow down to slaughter.                                                                                                             Because I called and you answered
                                                  not : I spake and you would not listen ; but did what is evil
                                  13 in my sight ; and chose the things in which I did not delight
                                                  therefore thus saith the Lord, Behold my servants shall eat
                                                  but you shall be hungry : behold my servants shall drink ; but
                                                  you shall be thirsty : behold my servants shall rejoice ; but you
                                  14 shall be ashamed : behold my servants shall triumph with joy :
                                                  But you shall scream for sorrow of heart, and howl for anguish
                                  15 of spirit.                                                      For you shall leave your name for a loathing to my
                                                  chosen.                                     As for you, the Lord will destroy you ; but to my
                                  16 servants, a new name shall be given which shall be blessed
                                                  on the earth : for they will bless the true God : and they who
                                                  swear on the earth, will swear by the true God.                                                                                                                                                                                             For they will
                                                  forget their former affliction and it shall not recur to their
                                   17 mind : for there shall be a new heaven and the earth shall be
                                                  new : and they shall no more remember former things, nor
                                   18 shall they ever come again into their mind.                                                                                                                                                                                              But in this they
                                                   shall find joy and gladness : for behold I am about to make
                                                                             ——:
     Ch. LXVI                        ESAIAS.
         Jerusalem a subject of joy, and this people of mine a subject of
     19 rejoicing.   And I will exult in Jerusalem and rejoice in my
         people ; and there shall no more be heard therein, the voice of
     20 wailing nor the sound of a mournful cry.         Nor shall there any
         more be there an untimely birth, nor an old man, who shall
         not complete his term.      For he who is a hundred years old
         shall be young ; and the sinner, who dieth at a hundred years,
     21 shall be deemed accursed.        And they shall build houses and
         dwell therein : and they shall plant vineyards and eat the fruits
     22 thereof.   They shall not build, and others inhabit : nor shall
         they plant and others eat : for according to the days of the
         tree of that life, shall be the days of this my people : for they
     23 shall wear out the works of their toils.       My chosen ones shall
         not labour in vain, nor shall they bring forth children lor a
         curse.   Because they are a seed blessed of God, both they and
     24 their offspring : therefore it shall come to pass, that before
         they call I will answer them : and while they are yet speaking
     25 I will say, What is the matter.          Then shall the wolves and
         the lambs feed together: and the lion shall eat straw like the
     LXVI.        ox.  But the serpent shall eat dust as bread.     Theyshall
         not hurt, nor shall they destroy on my holy mountain, saith
         the Lord.
       1     Thus saith the Lord, The heaven is my throne, and the
         earth, my footstool : what sort of an house will you build for
      2 me? And of what sort shall be the place of my rest ?            For all
         these things my hand hath made : and all these things are
         mine saith the Lord.      Upon whom therefore will I look down,
         but upon him only who is humble and quiet, and who trem-
      3 bleth at my words?        As for the wicked man, who sacrificeth
         to me a young bull : he is one who slayeth a dog : and though
         lie offereth me fine flour : it will be as the blood of swine.
         Though he offereth incense for a memorial, he is as a blasjme-
         mer.    As they have chosen their own ways : and their soul
       4 hath delighted in their abominations : I also will chuse their
         delusions, and pay them back their sins.            Because I called
         them and they did not answer—I spake, but they did not listen
         but did that which is evil in my sight, and chose the things
       5 in which I did not delight; hear the decisions of the Lord
         ye who tremble at his word, say, "O our brethren—(to them
             VOL. II.                      3 I
                                                     !
                                                                              E8AIAS.
                Ch. LXVI.
                       who hate you and are abominable, that the name of the Lord
                       may be glorified and appear to their joy, when they shall be
                  6 ashamed) a sound of screaming from the city ! a sound from
                       the temple ! the voice of the Lord rendering a recompense to
                       his adversaries
                  7           That a woman hath brought forth before she travailed ;
                       that before her pangs came on, they are over and a male child
                  8 born ; who hath heard such a thing, or who hath seen the
                       like ?         Did ever the earth bring forth in a day, or was ever a
                       nation born at once ?                          That Sion should travail and bring forth
                  9 her children, I myself gave this expectation ; yet thou didst
                       not remember me, saith the Lord.                                            Behold did I not make her
                       who beareth ; and her who is barren ? Said thy God.
                10            Eejoice              Jerusalem ! and sing praises therein, all ye who love
                       her !        Be exceedinglyjoyful with her, all ye who mourn for her !
                11 That you may suck and be satisfied from the breast of her
                       consolation—that you may suck and be fed deliciously, at
                12 the commencement of her glory.                                               For thus saith the Lord, Be-
                       hold I will glide to them like a peaceful stream, and like a
                       torrent deluging the glory of nations.                                              Their children shall be
                13 carried on shoulders, and shall be dandled on knees.                                                                      As one
                       whom his mother comforteth, so will I comfort you, and in
                14 Jerusalem you shall find consolation.                                                And you shall see it, and
                       your heart shall rejoice ; and your bones shall flourish like a
                       o-reen herb.                And the hand of the Lord will be made known to
                       them who fear him.                             And it will terrify them who are disobe-
                15 dient.              For behold ! the Lord will come as a fire, and his cha-
                       riots as a whirlwind, to execute his vengeance with wrath
                16 and his rebuke with flaming fire.                                           For with the fire of the Lord
                       all this land shall be tried, and all flesh with his sword.                                                              Many
                17 shall be the slain of the Lord !                                        They who consecrate and puri-
                       fy themselves for the gardens, and they who, in the outer
                       courts, eat swine's flesh, and the abominations and the mouse,
                       shall for this be consumed together, said the Lord.
                18             As I know their works and their reasoning I am coming
                       to      gather together all the nations and the tongues, and
                19 they shall come and see my glory.                                                   And I will leave among
                        them a sign, and those of them who escape I will send to the
                        nations—to Tharsis and Phud and Lud and Mosach and to
                   LXVL                                       ESAIAS.
           Ch.
                 Thobel and Greece and to the far distant isles.                                            They who
                 have not heard my name nor seen my glory—even they shall
           20 proclaim my glory among the nations ; and they shall bring
                 your brethren from all the nations, as a gift for the Lord with
                 horses and chariots, in litters borne by mules with umbrellas
                 over them, to the holy city Jerusalem, said the Lord; as the
                 children of Israel brought up their sacrifices for me with songs
           21 of praise to the house of the Lord.                               And of them I will take
           22 priests and Levites, said the Lord.                              For as the new heaven and
                the new earth, which I make, shall remain in my presence,
                 saith the Lord               so shall your seed and your name be establish-
                                           ;
          23 ed.         And it shall be, that month after month and sabbath after
                sabbath, all flesh shall come to worship before me, in Jerusa-
           24 lem, said the Lord.                     And they shall go forth, and see the car-
                casses of those men, who have transgressed against me.                                                  For
                their worm shall not die and their fire shall not be quenched,
                and they shall be a spectacle to all flesh.
                                                         JEEEMIAS.
           I.          I.   The word of God which came to Jeremias the son of Clicl-
                                 kias, one of the priests who dwelt at Anathoth in the land
                                 of Benjamin ; as the wore! of God came to him in the
                                 days of Josias son of Amos king of Juda, in the thirteenth
                                 year of his reign and came to him in the days of Joakim
                                son of Josias king of Juda even to the eleventh year of
                                Zedekias son of Josias king of Juda, even to the cap-
                                ture of Jerusalem, in the fifth month
             4         When this word of the Lord came to him, " Before I for-
             5 med thee in the womb, I knew thee, and before thou wast born
                 I hallowed thee.               I have appointed thee a prophet for nations."
             6 Thereupon I said,                       self-existent sovereign, Lord ! behold I
             7 know not how to speak, for I am a child.                                      And the Lord said
                to me, say not "For I am a child."                                   For thou shalt go to all,
                to whomsoever I send thee ; and according to all that I com-
            8 mand thee thou shalt speak.                             Be not afraid of them ; for I am
                 with thee to deliver thee saith the Lord.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 :
                    Ch. II.                                                                       JEREMIAS.
                        9               Then the Lord stretched forth his hand towards me and
                              touched my mouth ; and the Lord said to me, Behold I have
                    10 put my Avords in thy mouth.                                                                      Behold I have this day set thee
                              over nations and over kingdoms to root out and demolish and
                              destroy ; and to rebuild and plant.
                    11                  Then a word of the Lord came to me saying, "What dost
                             thou see."                         Whereupon I said, " I see a rod of an almond-tree."
                    12 And the Lord said to me, Thou hast seen well: for I have
                             watched over my words to perform them.
                   13                  Again a word of the Lord came to me a second time say-
                             ing : " What dost thou see ? "                                                        And I said, " A kettle                                              its bottom
                                                                                                                                                                                   ;
                    14 glowing hot ; and its mouth from the north.                                                                                                     Then the Lord
                             said to me, " From the north shall blaze out the evils against
                    15 all the inhabitants of this land."                                                                     For behold I am calling toge-
                             ther all the kingdoms of the earth from the north, saith the
                             Lord ; and they shall come and set, every one his throne against
                             the vestibules of the gates of Jerusalem and against all the
                    V) walls thereof round about, and against all the cities of Juda
                             and I will speak to them with a judicial process touching all
                             their wickedness.
                    17                 As they have forsaken me and sacrificed to strange Gods,
                             and worshipped the works of their hands, therefore gird thou
                             up thy loins and stand up and speak all that I command thee.
                             Be not afraid of them, nor terrified at their presence ; for I am
                    18 with thee to deliver thee, saith the Lord.                                                                                      Behold I have made
                             thee this day, like a fortified city and like a wall of brass, too
                             strong for all the kings of Juda and the chiefs thereof and the
                    19 people of the land.                                              Though they fight against thee they cannot
                              prevail over thee ; for I am with thee to deliver thee saith the
                              Lord.
                    II.                 Then he said, Thus saith the Lord, I remembered mercy
                       2 in thy youth ; and love, in thy mature age, that thou mightest
                       3 follow the Holy Israel, saith the Lord.                                                                                     The Holy Israel is to
                              the Lord the chief of his productions, all that devour him shall
                              be guilty of trespass : evils shall come upon them, saith the
                              Lord.
                       4                Hear a word of the Lord,                                                              house of Jacob and every fa-
                        5 mily of the house of Israel.                                                            Thus saith the Lord,
       5                                                                  —
      Ch. II.                      JEBEMIAS.
             What fault did your fathers find iu me, that they have
         withdrawn from me ; and have gone after vanities and become
       6 vain : and did not say, Where is the Lord, who brought us up
         out of the land of Egypt ; who led us through the wilderness
         through a boundless and untrodden land—through a land with-
         out water and without fruit—through a land which no man
         traversed, and where no man had a fixed abode.
       7     When I brought you to Channel that you might eat its
         fruits and the good things thereof ; you entered in and polluted
       8 my land ; and made my heritage an abomination.          The priests
         did not say, " Where is the Lord ? " and they who studied the
         law did not know me ; the pastors also transgressed against
         me ; and the prophets prophesied for Baal and went after an un-
       9 profitable thing.   For this also I will emplead you ; and your
      10 childrens' children I will emplead.    For go to the isles of Chet-
         tim and see ; and send to Kedar and make strict inquiry ; and
      11 see if such things have ever happened : have nations changed
         their Gods, though they are no Gods ? but my people have
      12 changed their glory for that which will not profit them.         At
         this the heaven was astonished and shocked exceedingly, saith
      13 the Lord.    Because my people did two things which are both
         evil : they forsook me, the fountain of living water ; and hewed
         out for themselves broken cisterns which cannot hold water.
      14     Is Israel a slave or a home born servant ?        Why was he
      1  for a prey ?   Against him lions roared and uttered their voice :
         they have made his land a desert and his cities are demolished
     16 so as to be uninhabitable.    Even thesonsof Memphis and Taph-
     17 nas have known and derided thee.       Hath not thy forsaking me,
         saith the Lord thy God, brought these things upon thee?
     18 Xow therefore what hast thou to do with the way to Egypt ?
         Is it to drink the water of Geon ?    Or what hast thou to do in
         the way to the Assyrians ?    Is it to drink the water of rivers ?
     19 Let this apostacy of thine correct thee.       And thy wickedness
         work conviction in thee.      And know and see how bitter a
         thing it is to forsake me, saith the Lord thy God.
     20      Further, I have no pleasure in thee, saith the Lord thy
         God, because of old thou hast broken thy yoke, and burst
         thy bands, and said, I will not serve thee; but I will go up
                                                                        ——:
        Ch. II.                    JEREMIAS.
           every liigli mount : and under every shady tree, I will there
            indulge my wantonness.
        21     I indeed planted thee an entirely good and fruitful vine
        22 how art thou,   degenerate vine, turned to bitterness ? Though
            thou wash thyself with nitre and use much soap : thou art
        23 stained by thine iniquities in my sight, saith the Lord.   How
            canst thou say, I am not polluted, nor have I gone after Baal ?
            View thy ways in the grave-yard, and recollect what thou hast
        24 done.   In the evening her voice raised the mournful cry.   She
            enlarged her ways to the waters of a desert : by the desires of
            her soul she was transported into raptures.   She is delivered
            up : who will bring her back ?  None who seek her will weary
            themselves.  In her humiliation they shall find her.
        25     Turn thy foot from a rugged way, and thy throat from
           thirst. But she said, I will act like one come to maturity. Be-
            cause she loved strangers, therefore after them she did go.
        26 As a thief when taken, is ashamed ; so shall the children of
            Israel be put to shame.
               They and their kings and their chiefs and their priests and
        27 their prophets, said to a stock, Thou art my father ; and to a
           stone, Thou hast begotten me.    And turned their backs to me
           and not their faces : yet in the time of their troubles they will
        28 say, Arise and save us.    Where now are thy gods which thou
            hast made for thyself?   Will they arise and save in the time
           of thy trouble ?
               Since according to the number of thy cities were thy gods
              Juda—and according to the number of the streets of Jeru-
        29 salem they burned incense to Baal ; why do you address me ?
            You are all guilty of impiety ; and you have all transgressed
        30 against me, saith the Lord.   In vain have I smitten your chil-
            dren, you did not receive instruction : a sword devoured your
            prophets, like a ravening lion; and you were not terrified.
        31 Hear a word of the Lord !     Thus saith the Lord, Was I a de-
            sert to Israel or a desolate land ? Why did my people say,
           "We will not be lorded over, nor come to thee any more."
        32 Will a bride forget her attire ; or a virgin, the ornaments that
           deck her bosom?      Yet my people have forgotten me, days
        83 without number.     Wilt thou yet study any decency in thy
            ways in search of love ?  Far from that, thou hast abandoned
      Ch. III.                           JEREMIAS.
      34 thyself to wickedness to pollute thy ways.                 And on thy hands
           hath been found the blood of innocent souls.               These I did not
      35 find in breaches into houses, but in every grove of oaks.                    Yet
           thou sayest, " I am innocent ; let his wrath be turned from
           me : " behold I will emplead thee for saying, I have not sin-
      36 ned.      Because thou hast made very light of repeating thy jour-
           nies, therefore thou shalt be made ashamed of Egypt, as thou
      37 hast been, of Assyria : for thou shalt come up thence with thy
           hands on thy head, for the Lord hath rejected thy confidence
      III.       and thou shalt not prosper in it.          If a man divorce his wife
           and she depart from him and marry another, can she return
           again to him ?      Would not such a wife be altogether polluted ?
        2 Yet thou hast played the harlot with many shepherds and hast
           returned to me saith the Lord.           Baise thine eyes, look forward
           and take a view ! where is there a place in which thou hast
           not prostituted thyself?          In the highways thou hast sat for
           them like a deserted daw, and polluted the land with thy
        3 whoredoms and with thy wicked acts, and retained many shep-
          herds for a stumbling block to thyself: yet with the face of
        4 a harlot and behaving indecently before them all, hast thou
           not returned home and called me father and the guide of thy
        5 youth ?      Will anger continue forever ?           Shall it be kept up to
           the last ?    Behold thou hast spoken and done these evil things :
           yet thou hast prevailed.
        o*  II. AGAIN the Lord said to me in the days of Josias the
           king, Hast thou seen what the house of Israel have done to
           me ?    They have gone up upon every high mountain and under
        7 every shady tree and have there committed whoredom—and
           after she had committed all these acts of whoredom I said,
        8 Keturn to me ; but she returned not.             And the treacherous Juda
           saw this treachery ; and I saw that when for all the whoredoms
           which Israel had committed and in which she had been
           caught, I had put her away and given her a bill of divorce in
           her hands, the treacherous Juda was not terrified, but went
        9 and committed the like herself.            Indeed the other's fornication
      10 was as nothing ;          she committed adultery with stocks and
           stones, and for all this the treacherous Juda turned not to me
       11 with her whole heart but only feignedly.               Then the Lord said
      12 to me, Israel hath justified herself more than the treacherous
        Ch. III.                    JEREMIAS.
            Juda ; go and proclaim these words to the north and thou shalt
            say, Keturn to me,      house of Israel, saith the Lord, and I
           will not set my face against you.   For I am merciful, saith the
        13 Lord and will not be angry with you forever.     Nevertheless ac-
           knowledge thine iniquity—that thou hast transgressed against
           the Lord thy God, and opened thy ways for strangers under
           every shady tree ; and hast not hearkened to my voice, saith
        14 the Lord.    Return, O apostate children, saith the Lord : for I
           will exercise dominion over you, and take one of a city and
        15 two of a family and bring you to Sion : and I will give you
           pastors according to mine own heart, and they shall tend and
        16 feed you with knowledge.      And when you are multiplied and
           increased in the land, saith the Lord, in those days they shall
           no more say, " The ark of the covenant of the Holy Israel."
           It shall no more come to mind nor be named ; nor shall it be
        17 covered nor made any more.      In those days and at that time
           Jerusalem shall be called The Throne of the Lord, and all the
           nations shall be gathered to it.  And they shall no more follow
        18 the desires of their own wicked heart.   In those days the house
           of Juda shall unite with the house of Israel, and they shall
           cometogetherfrom the land of the north and from all those coun-
           tries, to the land which I put in possession of their fathers.
        19     (p) (Whereupon I said, so be it,    Lord.)
               (J) Because I am to rank thee among children and give thee
           a choice land—the heritage of God the Supreme Ruler of
           nations ; therefore I said, " Call me Father," and, " From me
        20 you shall not turn away."    But as a wife dealeth treacherously
           with her husband, so the house of Israel dealt treacherously
        21 with me, saith the Lord.     A sound from the lips was heard, of
           the wailing and supplication of the children of Israel ; because
           they had transgressed in their ways—had forgotten God their
        22 Holy One.     Return, return, O children, and I will heal your
           bruises.
        23     (c) Behold we will be thy servants for thou art the Lord our
           God.    False indeed have been the hills and the strength of the
           mountains, but from the Lord our God is the salvation of Is-
        24 rael.  This shame consumed the labours of our fathers from
           our youth—Their flocks and their herds, their sons and their
        25 daughters.   We lay down in our shame and our dishonour co-
       Ch. IV                                        JEEEMIAS.
             vered us; because we sinned against our God—both we and
             our fathers from our youth to this day ; and hearkened not to
             the voice of the Lord our God.
       IV.           (J) If Israel will return, saith the Lord ; let him return to
             me.       And if he will remove his abominations from his mouth,
         2 and on account of me be filled with holy awe                                          and swear " As
                                                                                              ;
             the Lord liveth " with truth in judgment and justice : then
         3 shall the nations bless by him, and by him praise God in Jeru-
             salem.        For thus saith the Lord to the men of Juda and inha-
             bitants of Jerusalem, Break up for yourselves fallow grounds
         4 and sow not among thorns : be circumcised for your God and
             circumcise the stubbornness of your hearts, O men of Juda and
             ye inhabitants of Jerusalem ; lest my wrath break out like a fire
             and burn ; and there be none to quench it, because of the wick-
             edness of your devices.
         5     II.       (J)     MAKE proclamation in Juda and let it be heard in
             Jerusalem.            Say, Sound the trumpet in the land ; raise the
             screaming cry !                Say, Assemble together and let us go into the
         6 walled cities !             Break up and flee to Sion ; make all haste ; tarry
             not :     for I am bringing evils from the north and a great de-
         7 struction.            A lion has gone up from his den : a destroyer of na-
             tions hath begun his march and is come from his place to make
             this land a desolation ; and the cities shall be demolished so as
         8 to be uninhabitable.                    For these things gird on sackcloth ; wail
             and utter lamentation.                     Because the wrath of the Lord is not
         9 turned away from you, therefore it shall come to pass in that
             day, saith the Lord ; that the understanding of the king shall
             be destroyed ; and the understanding of the chiefs ; and the
             priests shall be confounded and the prophets amazed.
       10          (p) Upon this I said, O Sovereign Lord ! hast thou in-
             deed deceived this people and Jerusalem, saying, " There
            shall be peace," when lo ! the sword hath reached their very
             soul?
       11          (J) At that time let it be said to this people and to Jeru-
             salem, there is a spirit of wandering in the wilderness.                                               The
             way of the daughter of my people is not to purity nor to ho-
       12 liness.          A spirit of execution shall come for me and I am now
       13 denouncing my judgments on them.                                     Behold he shall come up
                   VOL. II.                                    3 K
                                                                                                                                 ;;
                                                            JEREMIAS.
             Ch. IV.
                   like a cloud, and his chariots like a whirlwind.                                    His horses are
                   swifter than eagles.
             14          (p) Alas for us ! we are undone !                                 Jerusalem ! wash thy
                   heart from wickedness that thou mayst be saved.                                            How long
                   do ill grounded reasonings for thy troubles remain in thee ?
             15          (J)     Because the voice of a messenger will come from Dan
             16 and distress will be heard from mount Ephraim ; Call to mind
                   the nations : behold they are come.                                Proclaim in Jerusalem,
                    " Predatory bands are coming from afar, and have uttered
              17 their voice against the cities of Juda."                                  Like men watching a
                    field they are all around her.                       Because thou wast not mindful
              18 of me saith the Lord, thy ways and thy devices have done
                    these things to thee.                  It is owing to thy wickedness that they
                    are bitter—that they have reached thy very heart.
              19          (p) My bowels ! my bowels are pained ! and every sensa-
                    tion of my heart.               My soul throbbeth ! my heart is torn.                             I can-
                    not keep silence ; for my soul hath heard the trumpet's sound ;
              20 the din of war and of distress.                           It calleth for contrition ; for the
                    whole land is in deep distress.                           My tent is suddenly whelmed
              21 in ruin ; my curtains are rent to pieces.                                  How long shall I see
                    men fleeing !            How long hear the sound of trumpets !
               22          (J) Because the rulers of my people did not know me,
                    they are foolish children and devoid of understanding.                                              They
                    are wise to do evil ; but to do good they have no knowledge.
               23          (p) I beheld the earth and lo ! a void!                                Then the heaven;
               24 and its lights were gone.                         I beheld the mountains ; and they
               25 were trembling, and all the hills were in perturbation.                                            I look-
                     ed ; and lo ! there was not a man ; and all the birds of the air
               26 were flown.               I beheld ; and lo ! Karmel was a desert ; and all the
                     cities were burned with fire.                      At the presence of the Lord ; and
                     because of his fierce anger, they are utterly destroyed.
                27         (J) Thus saith the Lord, The whole land shall be a desert
                28 but I will not make a complete end.                                 For these things let the
                      land mourn ; and the heaven above be covered with darkness
                      for I have spoken and I will not change my mind, I have
                      made an assault and will not withdraw from it.
                29          (p) At the sound of the cavalry and bended bow all the
                      country had fled.                 They had skulked into caves ; and hidden
                                                                     —
    Oh. V.                      JEREMIAS.
        themselves in forests ; and upon rocks they had climbed up.
        Every city was deserted ; in them not a man dwelt.
    30     And as for thee what wilt thou do ?     Though thou clothe
        thyself with scarlet and deck thyself with ornaments of gold
        though thou paint thine eyes with stibium, thy decoration will
        avail nothing ; thy lovers have cast thee off.  They will seek
    31 thy life.  For I have heard a sound as of one in labour—of
        thy groan, as of one who beareth her first child.
           (J) The voice of the daughter of Sion shall be weak : and
        she shall let her hands hang down.
           (p) Wo is me ! for my soul fainteth on account of the slain.
    V.     (J) Kun to and fro through the streets of Jerusalem ; and
        look, and inquire, and search in her broad ways.     If you can
        find—if there be a man, who executeth judgment and seeketh
      2 truth, I will be merciful to them saith the Lord.     They say,
        " As the Lord liveth."  Do they not on this very account swear
        to falsehoods ?
      3     (p)     Lord, thine eyes look for faithfulness.   Thou hast
        chastised them : but they have not grieved.      Thou hast con-
        sumed them and they would not receive instruction.         They
        have made their faces harder than a rock and refused to return.
      4 Then I said, perhaps they are poor, therefore they could
        not.  Because they have not known the way of the Lord and the
      5 judgment of God, I will go to the nobles and speak to them.
            (J) Because these knew the way of the Lord and the judg-
        ment of God, and lo ! with one consent, have broken the yoke
      6 and burst the bands ; therefore a lion from the forest hath smit-
        ten them and a wolf hath destroyed them even in their
        houses, and a leopard hath lain in wait against their cities.Let
        all who go out from them be hunted down.      Because they have
        multiplied their iniquities—have strengthened themselves in
      7 their apostacies ; for which of these can I be merciful to thee ?
        Thy children have forsaken me, and sworn by things which
        are no Gods.    When I fed them plentifully, they committed
      8 adultery, and revelled in the houses of harlots.   They became
        furious wanton steeds ; they neighed every one for his neigh-
      9 hour's wife.  Shall I not visit for these things, saith the Lord,
     10 and on such a nation as his shall not my soul be avenged ?    Go
                                      !
              Ch. V.                                        JEKEMIAS.
                    up against her battlements and demolish them : but you must
                    not make a complete destruction ; leave her buttresses, for they
              11 are the Lord's.                Because the house of Israel have broken faith
                    with me, saith the Lord, and the house of Juda have given the
              12 lie to their Lord and said, " These things are not so.                                         Evils will
              13 not come upon us ; we shall see neither sword nor famine.                                                Our
                    prophets are but wind and the word of the Lord was not in
                    them."
              14          Therefore          thus saith the Lord Almighty, because you
                    have spoken this word ; behold I have made these words of
                    mine for thy mouth, a fire ; and this people fuel ; and it shall
              15 devour them.                  Behold I am about to bring against you,
                    house of Israel, saith the Lord, a nation from afar—a nation
              16 the sound of whose tongue thou wilt not understand.                                                    They
                   are all mighty men ; and they shall devour your harvest and
              17 your bread ; and they shall devour your sons and your daugh-
                    ters ;    and they shall devour your flocks and your herds ; and
                    they shall devour your vineyards and fig trees and olive orch-
                   ards, and smite with the sword your fortified cities, in which
              18 you trusted.              But it shall come to pass in those days, saith the
                   Lord thy God, That I will not make an entire end of you.
              19 Now when you say, " Why hath the Lord our God done all
                    this to us ? " then thou shalt say to them, Because you served
                   strange Gods in your land, therefore you shall serve strange
              20 Gods in a land which is not yours.                                  Proclaim these things to
                   the house of Jacob and let them be published to the house of
                   Juda.
              21         (p)       Hear these things I beseech you, O foolish and stu-
                    pid people
                          (J)     They have eyes, but they do not see ; ears they have,
              22 but they do not hear.                       Will you not fear me, saith the Lord,
                   nor be struck with awe at the presence of me who have by an
                    everlasting decree, made sand a boundary to the ocean, so that
                   it   shall not pass it.                  Though it be tossed with a tempest, it
                   shall not prevail—though the waves thereof roar, they shall not
              23 overpass it.              But this people have a revolting and disobedient
                   heart.        They have turned aside and are gone : and did not say
              24 in their heart, let us now fear the Lord our God, who giveth
                                                                        —;
      Cb. VI.                    JEREMIAS.
         us the former and the latter rain, according to the time of com-
         pleting the appointed harvest.
      25     (p)  Though they have reserved these for us, your iniqui-
         ties have turned them out of their course : and your sins have
         removed good things from you.
      26     (J) Since there have been found among my people wicked
         men, who have set snares to destroy men and have caught
      27 them—As a trap which hath been set is full of birds, so their
         houses are full of deceit, therefore they became great and rich
      28 and overleaped judgment; they did not administer justice to
         the orphan, nor decide righteously the cause of the widow
      29 shall I not visit for these things, saith the Lord, and on such a
         nation as this shall not my soul be avenged ?
      30     Astonishing and horrible things have been done in this
      31 land.   The prophets prophesy falsehoods, and the priests clap-
          ped with their hands, and my people loved to have it so.   Now
          what will you do in regard to the consequences ?
      VI.     Assume courage ye sons of Benjamin who are from the
          midst of Jerusalem, and give a signal with the trumpet at The-
          koe ; and on Bethacharma erect a standard.   Because evils from
       2 the north are apparent, and a great destruction is begun, there-
          fore thy loftiness shall be destroyed.With regard to the daugh-
       3 ter of Sion ; to her shepherds shall come with their flocks, and
          pitch their tents around against her and feed.  [They will say]
       4 every one to his band "Prepare yourself for battle against
          her, arise and let us go up against her at noon."  " Alas for us
          the day is declined," " Because the shadows of the day fail,
        5 arise and let us go up against her by night, and let us destroy
        6 her foundations."   For thus saith the Lord, Cut down her
          trees : discharge engines against Jerusalem :     lying city ! in
        7 it all is oppression. As a reservoir sendeth forth water, so her
          wickedness gusheth out.     Open wickedness and misery may
        8 be heard in her continually.   With anguish and scourging be
          instructed,   Jerusalem ! lest my soul be alienated from thee
          lest I make thee an untrodden land, which shall not be inha-
        9 bited.  For thus saith the Lord, Glean, glean as a vineyard the
          remains of Israel.  Return again and again like a grape gather-
          er to his basket.
                     —                                               —:
           VI.                  JEEEMIAS.
       Ch.
       10    (p)  To whom shall I speak and give warning that he
          may hearken ? behold their ears are uncircumcised and they
          cannot hear.
             (J)  Behold the word of the Lord was to them an object
       11 of reproach and they would not.    Therefore my wrath, which
          I filled up and restrained that I might not destroy them, I now
          pour out on infants in the streets, and on the congregation of
          youths at the same time.  Because husband and wife shall be
       12 comprehended—the elder with him who is full of days ; there-
          fore their houses shall be transferred to others—their fields
          and their wives together.  Because I will stretch forth my
       13 hand against the inhabitants of this land, saith the Lord—be-
          cause from the least of them to the greatest, they have all com-
          mitted unrighteous deeds; from the priest to the false pro-
       14 phet, they have all practised falsehoods, and healed the hurt
          of my people by underrating it and saying Peace, Peace; but
       15 where is there peace? Were they ashamed because they failed?
          even in that case they were not ashamed ; nor were they sensi-
          ble of their infamy ; therefore they shall fall in the common
          ruin ; and in the time of visitation they shall perish, saith the
       16 Lord.  Thus saith the Lord, Stand in the highways and take a
          view and inquire for the ancient paths of the Lord, and see
          which is the good way and walk in it, and you shall find a pu-
          rification for your souls : but they said, " We will not go."
       17     I have set watchmen over you ; hearken to the sound of the
       18 trumpet.  But they said, " We will not listen." Therefore the
          nations heard ; even they who were tending their flocks.
       19     Hear   earth, behold upon this people I am bringing evils
          the fruit of their apostacy, because they attended not to my words
       20 and rejected my law.  Whydo you bring me incense from Saba,
          and cinnamon from a far distant country ? Your whole burnt of-
           ferings are not acceptable ; nor were your incense offerings sweet
       21 to me.   Therefore thus saith the Lord, Behold I send weakness
          on this people, and weak shall be fathers and sons with them; and
       22 neighbour with neighbour shall perish.  Thus saith the Lord,
           Behold a people is coming from the north ; and nations shall
       23 be roused from the extremity of the earth : they will grasp the
           bow and the spear : they are haughty and will show no mercy
                          —                                                                                                            :
                VII.                                        JEEEMIAS.
        Ch.
               their voice is like the roaring sea : on horses and in chariots
               they will draw up in array like fire, for battle against thee, O
               daughter of Sion.
        24            (c)      We have heard the fame of them.                                      Our hands are en-
               feebled.           Anguish hath taken hold of us—pangs, as of a wo-
               man in travail.
         25           (p)       Go not out to the fields and in the highways walk not,
               because the sword of the enemy dwelleth all around.                                                         daugh-
         26 ter of my people gird thee with sackcloth ; strew thyself with
               ashes : utter for thyself piteous lamentation like the mourning
               for a beloved.                For misery will suddenly come upon thee.
         27           (J)       I have made thee an assayer for trying peoples : and
         28 thou shalt know me when I try their ways.                                                   They are all dis-
                obedient and walk perversely.                                Being brass and iron they are
         29 all utterly consumed.                            The bellows could not stand the fire
                the lead is consumed.                         In vain doth the silversmith try to ex-
                tract silver.              Their wickedness was not to be melted.                                                You
                shall       call them rejected silver, for the Lord hath rejected
                them.
         VII.         2      III.       HEAR a word of the Lord, all ye of Judea! thus
           3 saith the Lord the God of Israel : amend your ways and your
           4 pursuits : and I will cause you to dwell in this place.                                                          Trust
                not in yourselves—in lying words : for you will derive no be-
                nefit from them who say, " The temple of the Lord ! it is the
            5 temple of the Lord ! "                         For if you thoroughly amend your ways
                and your pursuits, and actually execute judgment between
            6 man and man : and do not oppress the stranger and orphan and
                widow, nor shed innocent blood in this place, nor go after
            7 strange gods to your hurt : then will I cause you to dwell in
                this place—(in the land which I gave to your fathers) from age
                to age.
            S          But if you continue to trust in lying words from which you
            9 can derive no benefit ; and commit murder, and adultery and
                steal and swear to a falsehood, and burn incense to Baal ; and
                when you have gone after strange gods which you did not know ;
          10 you, because of your calamities, have then come and stood be-
                fore me, in the house which is called by my name, and said,
                " We have been restrained from committing these abominati-
          11 ons ; " is not this house of mine, which is called by my name, be-
                                                                                                                     ;;;;
            Ch. VII.                                   JEREMIAS.
                 come in your eyes a den of robbers ?                          Now behold I have seen
            12 this, saith the Lord.                 Go then to my place which was at Selo,
                 where I caused my name to dwell at first ; and see what I have
            13 done to it, for the wickedness of my people Israel.                                  Now there-
                 fore because you have done all these things : and I have spoken
                 to you and you have not hearkened to me ; and I have called
            14 you and you have not answered ; I therefore will do to this house
                 which is called by my name, and in which you have placed your
                 confidence; and to this place which I gave to you and your
            15 fathers ; as I did to Selo.                   And I will drive you from my pre-
                 sence, as I have driven out your brethren, the whole seed
            16 of Ephraim.              And as for thee, pray not thou for this people
                 nor supplicate for compassion to be shewn them : neither pray
            17 nor intercede with me for them ; for I will not listen.                                        Dost
                 thou not see what they are doing in the cities of Juda and in
            18 the streets of Jerusalem ?                       Their sons are collecting wood
                 and their fathers are kindling a fire : and their wives are knead-
                 ing dough to make cakes for the host of heaven : and they
            19 have poured out libations to strange gods, to vex me.                                             Do
                 they vex me? Saith the Lord : do they not vex themselves
            20 that their faces may be covered with shame ?                                   Therefore thus
                 saith the Lord, Behold my anger and my fury is poured upon
                 this place and on these men ; and on the cattle and on every
                 tree of their field and on all the products of the ground, and it
            21 shall burn and shall not be quenched.                                Thus saith the Lord,
                  Collect your whole burnt offerings with your sacrifices and
            22 eat flesh.          Because I did not speak to your fathers nor give
                  them a charge, on the day when I brought them up out of the
                 land of Egypt, concerning the whole burnt offerings and sacri-
            23 fices; but only gave them this charge saying, "Hearken to
                  my voice and I will be your God and you shall be my people
                 and walk in all my ways which I command you that it may
            24 be well with you."                  But they hearkened not to me nor inclined
                  their ear ; but walked in the devices of their own wicked heart,
                  and went backward and not forward from the day their fathers
            25 came out of the land of Egypt to this day : though I sent to
                  you all my servants the prophets—daily and early though I
             27 sent them, yet they hearkened not to me nor inclined their
                  ears—nay they hardened their necks more than their fathers;
                                                                                                                                                     :!
         Cli. VIII                                                JEEEMIAS.
         28 therefore thou shalt deliver them this message.                                                                         " This is
                the nation which hearkened not to the voice of the Lord, nor
                received instruction : faithfulness is gone from their mouth
         29 shave thy head and throw away the hair, and take up with thy
                lips a song of lamentation, for the Lord hath rejected and cast
         30 off the generation which hath done these things."                                                                 Because the
                children of Juda have done evil in my sight, saith the Lord,
                have set up their abominations in the house called by my name,
         31 to pollute it ; and have built up the altar of Tophet which is in
                the valley of the son of Ennom, to burn their sons and their
                daughters with fire ; a thing which I never commanded them
         32 and which never entered my mind ; therefore, behold days are
                coming saith the Lord, when they shall no more say, The al-
                tar of Tophet, and the valley of the son of Ennom," but,
                " The valley of them who were slain."                                                 For they shall bury in
         33 Tophet for want of room.                                     And the carcasses of this people shal1
                be for food for the birds of the air and the wild beasts of the
         34 earth ; and there shall be none to scare them away.                                                                  And I will
                cause to cease from the cities of Juda and from the streets of
                Jerusalem, the voice of joy and the voice of gladness; the
                voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride ; for the
                 whole land shall be a desolation."
         VIII.                At that time saith the Lord, they shall carry out the
                bones of the kings of Juda, and the bones of his chiefs, and the
                bones of the priests, and the bones of the prophets, and the
            2 bones of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, out of their graves ; and
                 expose them to the sun and moon and to all the stars, and to
                 all the host of heaven which they loved and served, and after
                 which they went and to which they were attached, and to
                 which they bowed down.                                  They shall not be lamented nor bu-
            3 ried ; but shall be for a spectacle, on the face of the earth (be-
                 cause they chose death rather than life) even to all the residue
                 left of that generation, in every place whither I shall drive
                 them.
            4           Thus saith the Lord, Doth not he who falleth rise again ?
            5 Or doth not he who turneth aside, return back?                                                                    Why then
                 hath this my people shamefully turned aside, and persisted in
            6 their error and refused to return ?                                                Hearken now and hear
                 Will they not speak thus, " There is not a man who repent-
                        VOL II.                                              3 L
                                                                                                                      ;
              Oh. VIII.                                  JEKEMIAS.
                   eth of his wickedness, saying, " What have I done ? "                                   He who
                   was running stop'd in his course like a horse tired with whinny-
                7 ing."       The stork in the heaven knoweth her season ; so doth the
                   dove and the swallow of the field; the ostriches observed the
                   time of their coming ; but my people do not know the judg-
                8 ments of the Lord.                  How can you say, " We are wise and the
                   law of the Lord is with us."                    In vain was it made ; the scribes
                9 had a lying pen. Are the wise ashamed ?                              They are indeed dis-
                   mayed and taken.                Because they rejected the law of the Lord
              10 therefore be their wisdom what it may, I will give their wives
                   to others and their fields to them who will take possession,
                   that they may gather the products thereof, saith the Lord.
              13         (c) There is not a cluster on the vine nor is there a fig on
              14 the fig trees, even the leaves are fallen.                        Why sit we still ?             As-
                   semble and let us go into the fortified cities ; and let us be cast oft'
                   there ; since G-od hath cast us off.                   He hath indeed given us wa-
              15 ter of gall to drink because we have sinned against him.                                        We
                   assembled for peace ; but there is no good ; for a time of heal-
              16 ing and behold trouble.                    From Dan we can hear the sound of
                   the snorting of his horses ; with the neighing of his cavalry the
                   whole earth is shaken.
                        (J) And on he will come and devour the land and the ful-
              17 ness thereof, the cities and them who dwell therein.                                     For be-
                   hold I am sending against you deadly serpents, which cannot
                   be charmed, and they will bite you with incurable wounds,
              18 which shall pain your throbbing hearts.
              19        Hark ! a sound of the cry of the daughter of my people
                   from a distant land !                " Is not the Lord in Sion ?                     Is he not
                   king there ? "          Because they provoked me to anger with their
                   graven images and with strange vanities.
             20         (p) " The summer is past ; the harvest is over and we are
                   not saved," at the destruction of the daughter of my people I
                   was whelmed in darkness : in distress I was seized with pangs
              21 like those of a woman in travail.                        Is there no balm in Gilead ?
                   Is there no physician there ?                   Why is not healing come for the
                   daughter of my people.
                    (c) The chorus, the inhabitants of the country.                          (J) Jehovah,          (p)
                 The prophet.
                                                                                                                                                                           :
         Cli. IX.                                                         JEKEMIAS.
         IX.                       !    that my head were water ! and mine eyes a fountain
                  of tears !                That I might weep day and night for this people of
            2 mine—for the slain of the daughter of my people !                                                                                          !   that I
                 had a remote lodging in the wilderness, that I might leave
                 my people and go away from them !
                          (J) Because they are all adulterers, an assembly of treach-
            3 erous men, and have bent their tongue like a bow—lying and
                  infidelity prevailed in the land—because they have proceeded
            4 from evils to evils, and have not known me, saith the Lord ; be
                  upon your guard every man against his neighbour, and in
                  your own brothers place no confidence ; for every brother will
            5 supplant, and every friend walk deceitfully ; every one will treat
                  his friend with contempt.                                              They cannot speak truth ; their
                  tongue hath learned to speak lies.                                                         They have done injustice,
            G and have not stopped to rectify it.                                                          There is usury upon usury,
                  deceit upon deceit ; they refused to know me, saith the Lord
            7 therefore thus saith the Lord, Behold I will melt them and
                  try them.                     What else can I do on account of the wickedness
            8 of the daughter of my people ?                                                          Their tongue is a wounding
                  dart :          the words of their mouth are deceitful.                                                                 To his neigh-
                  bour one speaketh peace ; when inwardly he harboureth enmi-
            9 ty.             Shall I not visit for these things, saith the Lord ; and on
          10 such a nation shall not my soul be avenged ?                                                                                  Take ye up a
                  lamentation for the mountains, and for the paths of the wilder-
                  ness, a song of woe ; for such is the desolation that there are no
                  men, nor is there a sound of existence heard from birds of
                  the air, nor from cattle.                                     They were confounded.                                       They are fled.
          11 I will indeed deliver up Jerusalem to captivity and make it a
                  den for jackals ; and the cities of Juda an uninhabitable desola-
                  tion.
          12                (p) Whoever is a wise man, let him understand this; and
                  let him, who hath a word from the mouth of the Lord, declare
                  to you, for what cause the land is destroyed—burned up like a
                  desert, so as not to be travelled.
           13              IV.           AGAIN the Lord said to me,
                           (J) Because they have forsaken my law which I set before
          14 them and have not hearkened to my voice ; but have gone af-
                  ter the pleasures of their own wicked heart, and after the idols
           9                                                                           —
          Ch. X.                          JEREMIAS.
          15 which their fathers taught them ;             therefore thus saith the
              Lord the God of Israel, behold I will feed them with worm-
         16 wood, and give them the water of gall to drink.           And I will scat-
              ter them among the nations, which neither they nor their fa-
             thers have known, and send a sword after them till they are
         17 consumed by it.          Thus saith the Lord, Call the mourning
             women and let them come ; send for the well instructed and
         18 let them utter a plaintive sound and take up a mournful la-
             mentation for you : and let your eyes collect tears, and your
             eye lids gush out water.
         1        (p) Because a sound of wailing is heard in Sion ; " Oh
             how wretched we are ! how greatly confounded because we
         20 have left our land, and abandoned our habitations : " hear I
             beseech you,        women ! a word of God : and let your ears
             receive the words of his mouth : and teach your daughters a
             song of woe ; and every woman, her neighbour the mournful
         21 dirge.     For death is gone up through your windows : it is come
             into your land, to destroy infants at home and young men in
         22     the streets :  and the carcasses of the men shall be for a spec-
             tacle on the open field throughout your land, like grass after
             a mower and there will be none to gather.
         23       (J) Thus saith the Lord, Let not the wise man boast of
             his wisdom : nor the mighty man boast of his strength ; nei-
         24 ther let the rich man boast of his riches : but let him who
             boasteth, boast of this only, that he understandeth and know-
             eth, that I am the Lord, who exercise mercy and judgment
             and justice on the earth : that in these things is my delight,
         25 saith the Lord.       Behold days are coming, saith the Lord, when I
              will visit upon all the uncircumcised, their uncircumcisions
         26 Upon Egypt, and upon Idumea, and upon Edom, and upon
             the Ammonites, and upon the Moabites, and upon all that
             have their foreheads shaven—namely them who dwell in the
              wilderness.
                  Because all the nations are uncircumcised in flesh, and all
         X.     the house of Israel are uncircumcised in their hearts ; hear
              the word of the Lord which he hath spoken for you                    house
              of Israel.   Thus saith the Lord, Learn not the ways of the na-
              tions, and at the signs of heaven be not dismayed, because
           3 they are terrified at these appearances, because the ordinances
                                                                                                                 ;
       Oh. X.                                     JEEEMIAS.
            of the nations are vain.                 Timber is cut from the forest : a car-
            penter's work and a molten image are adorned with silver and
        4 gold.         Having fastened them with mallets and nails they will
         5 place them and they are not to be moved.                                     They are silver
            which can be turned in a lathe ; they cannot walk.                                           They
         9 are silver which can be formed into plates.                                     From Tharsis
            will come the gold of Mophaz, and the hand of men skilled
            in casting gold.              They are all the workmanship of artists.
         5 With blue and purple raiment they are to be clothed : They
            must be taken up and carried; for they cannot walk.                                           Fear
            them not for they can do you no harm, and there is no good
       11 in them.            Thus shall you say to them. Let the gods, which
            have not made heaven and earth, perish from the earth and
       12 from under heaven.                  It is the Lord who made the earth by his
             power, who established the world by his wisdom : and by his
       13 understanding spread out the heaven, and the multitude of
             waters in heaven : when he brought up clouds from the ex-
             tremity of the earth ; he made the lightning for rain, and
       14 brought light forth from his treasuries.                            Every man on account
             of knowledge became foolish.                       Every rnelter of gold was put
             to shame for his graven images, because he cast falsities and
       15 there is no breath in them.                         These ridiculous works are vain
       16 in the time of their visitation they shall perish.                             Unlike to these
             is the portion of Jacob : for he who formed all things is his
       17 inheritance.             His name is, The Lord.                   He hath collected from
       18 abroad the substance of thee, dwelling in chosen places.                                          For
             thus saith the Lord, Behold I am about to subvert with afflic-
             tion the inhabitants of this land, that the stroke may reach thee.
        19 Alas for thine affliction ! the stroke given thee is painful.
                   (p)     Upon this I said, This is a wounding thee indeed !
        20 it hath sunk deep in thee ! thy tent is in a miserable state.                                       It
             is ruined.        And all thy curtains are torn to pieces.
                   (c)    My children and my flocks are no more.                               There is not
             a trace of my tent left—no remains of my curtains.
        21         (J)     Because the shepherds were foolish and sought not
             the Lord, therefore the whole flock was thoughtless and they
        22 are scattered.              A noisy sound ! Hark ! it is coming.                             And a
              ^reat commotion from the land of the north, to make the cities
              of Juda a desolation and a haunt of ostriches.
                                                                             —:
       Ch. XL                        JEKEMIAS.
       23      (p)  I know,     Lord, that the way of man is not in him-
           self, nor can a man who travelleth ensure to himself a prosper-
       24 ous journey.     Correct us, O Lord, but with judgment and not
           with wrath, that thou mayst not make us few in number.
       25 Pour out thy wrath on the nations that knew thee not, and on
           the families which have not invoked thy name.         Because they
           have devoured Jacob and consumed him, and have made his
           pasture a desolation.
       XL       V.   THE word which came to Jeremias from the Lord,
         2 saying, Hear ye the words of this covenant : and thou shalt
           speak to the men of Juda, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem
         3 and say to them, Thus saith the Lord the God of Israel, Cur-
         3 sed is the man who will not hearken to the words of that
           covenant which I enjoined on your fathers, at the time when
           I brought them out of the land of Egypt ; out of the iron fur-
           nace saying, Hearken to my voice, and do all that I command
           you: and you shall be my people, and I will be your God;
         5 that I may perform the oath which I sware to your fathers
            to give them a land flowing with milk and honey, as at this
           day.   Thereupon I answered and said, So be it,       Lord.
         6     Then the Lord said to me, Eead these words in the cities
           of Juda and in the streets of Jerusalem, and say, Hear the
         8 words of this covenant and do them.       And when they did not
         9 the Lord said to me, A conspiracy is found among the men of
        10 Juda and among the inhabitants of Jerusalem.             They have
            turned back to the iniquities of their fathers, who refused to
           hearken to my words.       And lo they are going after strange
            srods to serve them.   Both the house of Israel and the house of
            Juda have broken my covenant which I made with their fa-
        ll thers; therefore thus saith the Lord, Behold I am bringing
            upon this people evils, from which they shall not be able to
            escape.  And when they cry to me I will not hearken to them.
        12 Let the cities of Juda and the inhabitants of Jerusalem go and
            cry to the gods, to which they burn incense ; but which can-
        13 not save them in the time of their adversity.       Since according
            to the number of thy cities were thy gods, O Juda—and ac-
            cording to the number of the streets of Jerusalem, you erected
     Oh. XII.                  JEEEMIAS.
     14 altars to burn incense to Baal; therefore pray not thou for
         this people, nor intercede for thern with supplication and pray-
         er ; for I will not hearken when they call on me in the time
         of their distress.
     15     What! my beloved hath committed abomination in my
        very house ! will prayers and holy meats remove from thee thy
     16 wickedness? or by means of these shalt thou escape?       The
        Lord called thy name The heautiful shady olive.  At the sound
       of lopping it a fire was kindled against it.Great is the afflic-
     17 tion coming upon thee.   Its branches are destroyed. The Lord
        who planted thee hath denounced evils against thee, for the
        wickedness of the house of Israel and the house of Juda, for
        they have brought this upon themselves by burning incense
        to Baal to provoke me.
     18     (p)  Inform me,   Lord, and let me know !
     19     Then I saw their devices.  As for me I like a lamb led to
        slaughter did not know.  Against me they had formed a wick-
        ed design, saying, "Come, let us put poison in his bread, and
        cut him off from the land of the living ; and let his name be
        mentioned no more."
     20       Lord, who judgest righteously, trying reins and hearts !
        let me see thy vengeance on them, for to thee I have laid open
        my cause.
     21     On this account, thus saith the Lord to the men of Ana-
        thoth, who seek my life, who say thou shalt not prophesy in
        the name of the Lord—if thou dost ; thou shalt die by our
     22 hand, " Behold I will punish them.  Their young men shall die
        by the sword.  And their sons and their daughters shall die by
     23 famine.  And there shall not be a remnant of them left ; for J
        will bring evils on the inhabitants of Anathoth in the year of
        their visitation."
     XII.     (p)  Bighteous as thou art, O Lord, can I defend a
        cause against thee ? but let me speak to thee in respect to judg-
        ments.   Why is the way of wicked men prosperous? why are
      2 they happy who have been all guilty of perfidy?     Thou hast
        planted them and they have taken root, they have generated
        and produced fruit.  Thou art near in their mouth, but far from
      3 their reins. But thou,    Lord, knowest me.   Thou hast tried
                                                                                                                                                                               :
                  Cli. XII.                                                      JEEEMIAS.
                          ray heart before thee.                               Prepare them for the day of their slaugh-
                    4 ter.             How long shall the land mourn, and all the grass of the
                          field be withered, for the wickedness of them who dwell there-
                          in ?         The cattle and fowls are vanished ; because they said, God
                          will not regard our ways.
                     5            (J)         Thy feet run and fail thee : what preparation canst
                          thou make, for horses ?                                   In thy land of peace hast thou been se-
                     (j   cure ? how wilt thou act at the swelling of Jordan ? since even
                          thy brethren and the house of thy father have dealt perfidious-
                          ly with thee ; when they have raised the cry of war—have as-
                          sembled in pursuit of thee, wilt thou trust them, because they
                     7 speak thee fair ?                              I have forsaken my house, I have abandoned
                          my heritage, I have given the beloved of my soul into the
                     8 hands of her enemies.                                      My heritage became to me like a lion
                    9 in a forest ; against me it roared ; therefore I hated it.                                                                                 Is not
                           this heritage of mine the den of a hyena ? to me indeed it is the
                          den around her.                            Go, collect all the beasts of the field and let
                   10 them come and devour it.                                              Many shepherds have destroyed my
                           vineyard, they have defiled my portion, they have made my
                   11 beloved portion a trackless desert :                                                        it is given up to total de-
                           struction.                 On my account the whole land is utterly desolated
                           because there is not a man who layeth this to heart, a-
                   12 gainst every outlet by the wilderness destroyers are come : be-
                           cause the sword of the Lord devoureth from one end of the
                   13 land to the other ; there is no peace for any flesh.                                                                              Sow wheat
                           and reap brambles.                                Their portions shall not profit them.                                                        Be
                   14 ashamed of your boasting, of reproaches against the Lord.                                                                                         For
                           thus saith the Lord, respecting all those malignant neighbours,
                           who touch my inheritance which I parcelled out to my peo-
                           ple Israel ;                 behold I am about to pluck them out of their land,
                   15 and I will drive out Juda from among them, but after I have
                           driven them out, I will return and have compassion on them,
                    16 and settle them every one in his inheritance evene very one in
                            his own land.                      And it shall come to pass, if they will diligently
                            learn the way of my people to swear by my name, "As the
                            Lord liveth" as they taught my people to swear by Baal ; they
                    17 shall be established among my people : but if they will not re-
                            turn ;          I will assuredly root out that nation with ruin and de-
                            struction.
                                                                                       —
                                        JEKEMIAS.
     Ch. XIII.
     XIII.        VI.    Thus saith the Lord, Go and get thee a linen gir-
          dle and gird it about thy loins ; but it must not be washed with
       2 water.      And when I had procured the girdle according to the
       S word of the Lord and had girded it about rny loins, a word of
       4 the Lord came to me saying, Take the girdle which is about
          thy loins, and arise and go to the Euphrates and hide it there
       5 in the hole of the rock.         So I went and hid it by the Euphrates
       (3 as the Lord commanded me.              And after many days the Lord
          said to me, "Arise and go to the Euphrates and take thence
       7 the girdle, which I commanded thee to hide there."                   So I went
          to the river Euphrates and digged and took the girdle out of
         the place where I had buried it ; and behold it was rotten and
       8 good for nothing.         Then a word of the Lord came to me say-
       9 ing, Thus saith the Lord, So will I mar the haughtiness of Ju-
     10 da, and the haughtiness of Jerusalem, that great haughtiness
         them who refuse to hearken to my words, and have gone af-
         ter strange gods to serve them and worship them : and they
     11 shall be like this girdle which is good for nothing.                For as the
         girdle is tightly bound around the loins of its owner ; so did I
         bind to myself the house of Israel, and the whole house
         of Juda ;      that they might be for me a renowned people,
         and for a boast and for a glory.            But they have not hearkened
     12 to me.       Therefore thou shalt say to this people, "Every lea-
         thern bottle is to be filled with wine."           And if they say to thee,
         Do we not know very well that every leathern bottle is to be
     13 tilled with wine ?        Then thou shalt say to them, Thus saith the
         Lord, Behold I will fill the inhabitants of this land, both their
         kings who are seated as sons of David on their thrones, and
         the priests and the prophets, even Juda and all the inhabitants of
     14 Jerusalem, with drunkenness.              And I will scatter them, their
         heads of families and their brethren, both fathers and their sons
         at the same time.       I will not have compassion saith the Lord, nor
         will I spare, nor pity them for their destruction.
     15       (p)   Hearken and give ear and be not elated ; for the Lord
     16 hath spoken, Give glory to the Lord your God, before the
         darkness cometh, and before your feet stumble on the dark
         mountains ; when you will wait for light ; and the shadow of
     17 death will be there ; and they shall be placed in darkness.                  But
         if you will not hearken, your soul shall weep in secret for your
              VOL. II.                        3 M
           XIV.                  JEREMIAS.
       Ch.
           haughtiness ; and tears shall gush from your eyes ; because the
           flock of the Lord is destroyed.
       18     (J)   Say to the king and the rulers, Humble yourselves
           and sit on the ground ; for from your head is taken your crown
        19 of glory.The cities of the south shall be shut up and there shall
           be none to open. Juda is removed ; they have made a complete
        20 removal.  Eaise thine eyes,  Jerusalem, and see them who are
           coming from the north !Where is the flock that was given thee
        21 —the flock of thy glory ?What wilt thou say, when these visit
           thee ? seeing thou thyself hast taught them against thyself les-
           sons for government. Will not pangs seize thee as a woman in
        22 travail ?Now shouldst thou say in thy heart, " Why have such
           things befallen me?"  For the greatness of thine iniquity, thy
           back is uncovered that thy heels may be exposed to view !
        23 Will an Ethiopian change his skin and a leopard her spots ?
           As for you then, will you who have learned these evils be able
        24 to do good ?   Therefore I have scattered them like stubble
        25 whirled by wind to a desert ; this then shall be thy lot and por-
           tion for your disobeying me, saith the Lord.As thou hast for-
        26 gotten me and trusted in lies ; I therefore will expose thee na-
        27 ked to view that thy shame may be seen—namely thy adulte-
           ry and thy neighing and the lewdness of thy whoredom.    On
           the mounts and in the fields I have seen thine abominations.
           Alas for thee, Jerusalem, because thou hast not purified thy-
           self to follow me.  How much longer will it be before thou
           wilt?
        XIY.      VII.   THERE came also to Jeremias a word of the
         2 Lord concerning the drought.   Judea mourned and her gates
            were deserted : and darkness overspread the land and the cry
         3 of Jerusalem ascended.  When her nobles sent their underlings
            for water ; they went to the wells and found no water and re-
         4 turned with their vessels empty. A stop was put to the works
            of the field, because there was no rain.   The husbandmen
          5 were confounded ; they covered their heads. The hinds calv-
            ed in the field and left their young, because there was not a
          6 plant. The wild asses stood in the forests and snuffed up the
            wind : their eyes failed because there was no grass.
          7    Our sins have risen up against us.    Lord, deal with us
                                                                                                                                        :
         Ch. XIY.                                           JEREMIAS.
               for thine own sake : for our sins are many in thy sight—for
           8 we have sinned against thee.                                   Thou,             Lord, art the hope of
               Israel, and savest in time of troubles.                                       Why art thou become
               as a stranger in the land—as a traveller turning aside for a
           9 lodging ?                Wilt thou be like a man asleep or like a head of a
               family who cannot save? as thou,                                           Lord, art among us and
         10 we are called by thy name,                                     !   do not forget us.                    Thus saith
               the Lord to this people,
                      (J)         They have loved to wander and did not refrain, there-
               fore God hath not prospered their ways, he will now rernem-
         11 ber their iniquity,                      (p) Then the Lord said to me, pray not for the
         12 prosperity of this people ; for though they fast I will not hear
               their prayer ; and though they offer whole burnt offerings and
         13 sacrifices, I will not accept them.                                   For with sword, and with fa-
                mine, and with pestilence, I will utterly consume them.                                                     There-
                upon I said,                  self-existent Lord ! behold their prophets pro-
                phesy and say, " You shall not see the sword                                           nor shall there be
                                                                                                    ;
                famine among you.                      For I will give truth and peace in this land
                and in this very place."
         14           Then the Lord said to me, These prophets prophesy false-
                hood in my name ; I did not send them, nor command them,
                nor did I speak to them.                            Because they prophesy to you lying
                visions and divinations, and auguries, and the devices of their
          15 own hearts ; therefore thus saith the Lord concerning those
                prophets, who prophesy falsehoods in my name, and who say
                (though I did not send them) " There shall be no sword nor fa-
                mine in this land," they shall die a direful death and by fa-
          16 mine these prophets shall be consumed.                                                 And the people to
                whom they prophesy, with their wives and their sons and their
                daughters, shall, by reason of the sword and the famine, be
                cast out in the streets of Jerusalem, and there shall be none to
          17 bury them, when I pour out these evils on them.                                                           Therefore
                 thou shalt deliver to them this word, "Collect tears for your
                 eyes day and night and let them not fail ; for with a bruise the
                 daughter of my people is bruised, and the wound is exceed-
                 ingly painful."
          18            (p)      If I go out into the field, behold the slain of the sword !
                 and if I go into the city ; behold the distress of famine ! see-
                 ing priest and prophet are gone to a land which they knew not
                                                                                    —
          Ch. XV.                        JEEEMIAS.
          19 hast thou utterly rejected Juda and is thy soul alienated from
              Sion?    Why hast thou smitten us, and there is no cure for us ?
              We waited for peace, and there was no good ; for a time of
          20 healing, and behold trouble !         We acknowledge,         Lord, our
              sins and the iniquities of our fathers—that we have sinned
          21 against thee.        be appeased for thy name's sake.       Destroy not
              the throne of thy glory ; remember,            dissolve not thy cove-
              nant with us.    Is there any among the idols of the nations who
              can give rain ? and if the heaven shed its abundance, art thou
              not he who causeth it.        Therefore we will wait on thee,
              Lord, for thou hast done all these things.
          XV.       Then the Lord said to me, Though Moses and Samuel
              stood before me, my soul is not towards them.          Send away this
           2 people and let them go.         And if they say to thee, " Whither
              shall we go?" then thou shalt say to them, Thus saith the
             Lord, such as are for pestilence, to pestilence, and such as are
             for the sword, to the sword ; and such as are for famine, to fa-
           3 mine ; and such as are for captivity, to captivity.          For I will
             send against them four kinds of avengers, saith the Lord, the
             sword to slay ; and the dogs to tear ; and the wild beasts of the
           4 earth, and the birds of the air to devour and destroy.            And I
              will deliver them up to distress in all the kingdoms of the
              earth, on account of Manasses son of Ezekias king of Juda
           5 for all that he did in Jerusalem.        Who will pity thee, Jerusa-
              lem? or who will bemoan thee? or who will turn aside to in-
           6 quire after thy welfare ?    Thou hast turned thy back on me, saith
              the Lord: backwards thou shalt go.          And I will stretch forth
           7 myhand and destroy thee. I will no longer bear with them ; but
              utterly disperse them.     In the gates of my people they are be-
             reaved of children ; my people are destroyed because of their
           8 wickedness.      Their widows are multiplied above the sand of
             the sea.     Against a mother I have brought soldiers—misery
              at noon-day.   Upon her I have cast suddenly terror and conster-
           9 nation.    She who was the mother of seven is childless ; her soul
              is afflicted, the sun set upon her while it is yet mid-day ; she is
             ashamed and confounded : the rest of them I will deliver up to
             the sword before their enemies.
          10     (p)   Wo is me,        my mother, what sort of a person hast
             thou bore me ! a man of strife and contending with all this
                                                                           —;
      Ch. XVI                      JEREMIAS.
          land ! I have neither lent on usury : nor hath any one lent to
          me; yet my strength is spent among them who curse me.
      11 Be it so,    Lord, while they enjoy prosperity.
             (J) Did I not stand by thee, in the time of their calamities
         and in the time of their affliction, for good with the enemy ?
      12 Shall the sword be felt and thy strength be a coat of mail?
      13 Thy treasures indeed I will give for a spoil in all thy borders,
      14 as a ransom for all thy sins ; and I will make thee a slave to
         thine enemies around in the land which thou hast not known.
         For a fire is kindled from my wrath and against you it shall
         blaze.
      15     (p)    Lord, remember me and visit me and save me from
         them, who are persecuting me past forbearance.             Consider
         how I have for thy sake borne reproach from them who de-
      16 spise my words.    Bring them to an end.      But let thy word be
      17 to me the joy and rejoicing of my heart.      Because I am called
         by thy name,       Lord Almighty, I did not sit in the council
         of those scorners; but was struck with awe because of thy
     18 hand.    I sat alone because I was full of bitterness.      Why do
         they who grieve me prevail over me?            My wound is deep,
         how can I be healed?      It is indeed become to me like deceit-
         ful water which cannot be trusted.
     19      (J) Therefore thus saith the Lord, If thou wilt return I
         will reinstate thee ; and in my presence thou shalt stand.      And
         if thou wilt lead out the precious from the vile, thou shalt be
         as my mouth ; and they shall turn to thee and thou shalt not
     20 turn to them.    And I will make thee to this people like a strong
         wall of brass : though they fight against thee, they shall not pre-
     21 vail over thee ; for I am with thee to save thee and rescue thee
         out of the hand of the wicked.     And I will redeem thee out of
     XVI.       the hand of pestilent men.      But thou must not take a
         wife, saith the Lord G-od of Israel : nor shall a son or a daugh-
      3 ter be born to thee in this place.    For thus saith the Lord con-
         cerning the sons, and concerning the daughters born in this
         place, and concerning the mothers who bare them, and concern-
      4 ing their fathers who begot them in this land; by a direful
         death they shall die ; they shall not be lamented, nor shall they
         be buried ; they shall be for a spectacle on the face of the earth
         they shall be for the wild beasts of the earth, and the birds of
                                                                                                                                          :
                    XVI.
             Ch.                                              JEKEMIAS.
                   the air.         By the sword they shall fall, and by famine they shall
               5 be consumed.                   Thus saith the Lord, Join not in their funeral
                   entertainments ; go not to make lamentation nor bewail them.
               6 Since I have taken away my peace from this people, no la-
                   mentation shall be made for them ; nor shall any cut theni-
               7 selves nor be shaved.                         There shall neither be bread broken in
                   their mourning, to comfort them for the dead ; nor shall a cup
                   of consolation be given to any one for his father or mother.
               8 Into a house of feasting thou shalt not enter, to sit with them
               9 to eat and to drink : for thus saith the Lord the God of Israel,
                   behold I am about to remove out of this place, before your
                   eyes and in these your days, the sound of joy and the sound
                   of mirth, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the
                   bride.
             10           Now when thou hast proclaimed to this people all these
                   words and they say to thee, " Why hath the Lord denounced
                   against us all these evils ?                           What is our iniquity ?                         And what
                   is    our sin which we have committed against the Lord our
             11 God?             Then thou shalt say to them, Because your fathers have
                   forsaken me, saith the Lord, and have run after strange gods
                   and served them aud worshipped them, and have forsaken
             12 me and have not kept my law ; and you have done evil worse
                   than your fathers ; and lo ! you walk every one after the de-
                   sires of your wicked heart, that you may not hearken to me
             13 therefore I will hurl you out of this land, into a land which
                    neither you nor your fathers knew ; and you shall there serve
             14 strange gods which will shew you no mercy : therefore be-
                    hold the days are coming, saith the Lord, when they shall
                    no more say, "As the Lord liveth who brought up the Israel-
             is ites out of the land of Egypt : but, as the Lord liveth, who
                    brought up the house of Israel from the north, and from all
                    the countries to which they were driven ; " for I will bring
              16 them again to their land which I gave to their fathers.                                                      Behold
                    I will send many fishers, saith the Lord, and they shall fish
                    them : and after that I will send many hunters and they shall
                    hunt them, on every mountain and every hill, and out of the
              17 holes of the rocks.                         Because mine eyes are on all their ways,
              18 and their iniquities are not hid from mine eyes ; therefore I
                    will doubly requite them for their wickedness and their sins
      Ch. XVII.                    JEREMIAS.
         —for their having defiled my land with the carcasses of their
         abominations, and for their acts of iniquity with which they
         have caused my heritage to trangress.
      19     (p)     Lord, thou art my strength and my help, and my
         refuge in days of affliction.    To thee nations will come from
         the extremity of the earth and say, What lying idols did our
      20 fathers possess ! there is no advantage in them.     If a man make
         gods for himself, they are indeed no gods.
      21     (J) For this purpose behold ! I will at that time mani-
         fest my hand to them and make known to them my power,
      XVII.    5 and they shall know that my name is The Lord.           Cur-
          sed is the man whose hope is on man—who shall fix the flesh
          of his arm on him, and whose heart hath departed from the
       6 Lord.    He shall be like the wild myrtle in the desert.    He shall
          not see when good cometh ; but shall dwell in parched places
       7 and in a desert—in a salt land which is uninhabited.      But bless-
          ed is the man who hath trusted in the Lord ; and whose hope
       8 is the Lord.    He will be like a thriving tree near waters which
          shall shoot out its roots in a moist soil.    It will not be afraid
          when heat cometh, though its stock be loaded with branches.
          In a year of drought it will not be afraid, nor will it fail to
         bear fruit.
       9      (p) The heart is deep beyond all things ; so also is a man,
          who then can know him ?
      10      (J) I the Lord search hearts and try reins, to give to every
          one according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his
      11 devices.   A partridge whistled and collected young which it
          did not bring forth, increasing its wealth but not with judg-
          ment ; in the midst of its days they will leave it, and at its end
          it will be a fool.
      12      (p) Our sanctuary is an exalted throne of glory.       Thou,
      13 Lord art the hope of Israel.     Let all who forsake thee be asham-
          ed ; let them who have apostatised be enrolled in the dust,
      14 because they have forsaken the Lord the fountain of life.
          Heal me,       Lord, and I shall be healed.        Save me, and I
          shall be saved.   Because thou art my boast, behold they say to
      15 me, "Where is the word of the Lord?           Let it come.    As for
      16 me, I was not weary of following thee, nor did I desire the
          day of a man : thou knowest.       The words which pass my lips
      17 are before thee ; be not estranged from me.         Spare me in an
        Ch. XVIII.              JEKEMIAR
        18 evil day. Let my persecutors be ashamed ; but let me uot be
           shamed.  Let them be dismayed : but let not me be dismayed.
           Bring upon them an evil day.    Crush them with a double
           crush.
        19  VIII.  (J) THUS saith the Lord, Go and stand in the gates
           of the children of thy people at which the kiugs of Juda come
        20 in and at which they go out, even at all the gates of Jerusalem,
           and thou shalt say to them, Hear the word of the Lord,
           kings of Juda and all Juda and all Jerusalem, who enter in by
        21 these gates ! Thus saith the Lord, Take heed to yourselves
        22 and carry no burdens on the sabbath day ; nor go out of the
           gates of Jerusalem. Neither carry burdens out of your houses
           on the sabbath day nor do any work. Hallow the sabbath day
        23 as I commanded your fathers. Though they did not hearken,
           though they did not incline their ear, but stiffened their necks
        24 more than their fathers, that they might not hearken to me nor
           receive instruction ; yet if you will hearken to me, saith the
           Lord, and not carry burdens through the gates of this city on
        25 the sabbath day, but hallow the sabbath clay by doing no work
           thereon ; there shall enter in at the gates of this city, kings and
           chiefs seated on the throne of David and riding in chariots and
           on horses, they and their chiefs, the men of Juda and the inha-
           bitants of Jerusalem ; and this city shall be inhabited for the
        26 age. And there shall come from the cities of Juda and from
           around Jerusalem and from the land of Benjamin and from
           the plain and from the mountain and from the country to the
           south, people bringing whole burnt offerings and sacrifices
           and incense and fine flour and frankincense—bringing offer-
        27 ings of thanksgivings to the house of the Lord.But if you
           will not hearken to me to hallow the sabbath day, so as not to
           carry burdens nor come in at the gates of Jerusalem on the
           sabbath day, I will kindle a fire in the gates thereof and it
           shall consume the streets of Jerusalem and shall not be
           quenched.
        XVIII.  IX.   THE word which came to Jeremias from the Lord,
           saying, "Arise and go down to the house of the potter and
         3 there thou shalt hear my words."So I went down to the house
                                                                                                        ,
             XVIII.                           JEREMIAS.
       Cb.
            of the potter ; and behold he was making a piece of work on
        4 stones ; and the vessel, which he was fashioning with his hands
            fell, whereupon he again made it a vessel of another sort as it
        5 seemed good to him to make it.                         Then a word of the Lord
        6 came to me saying, Cannot I do with you,                               house of Israel,
            as this potter?         Behold you are in my hands like the clay of
        7 the potter.         When I speak to a nation or kingdom, that I will
         8 remove and destroy them ; if that nation turn from all their
            evils, I will relent in respect to the evils which I was resolv-
        9 ing to bring on them.               And when I speak to a nation and king-
       10 dom that I will build up and replant : If they do evil in my
            sight so as not to hearken to my voice, I indeed will alter my
            mind in respect to the good things which I spoke of doing for
            them.
       11        Now I have said to the men of Juda and to the inhabitants
            of Jerusalem, Behold I am preparing evils against you and
            forming against you a determination ; turn therefore every one
            from his evil way and make better things the objects of your
       12 pursuit : but they said, We will act like men.                              We will fol-
            low our own courses ; and what every one findeth agreeable to
       13 his own wicked heart that we will do.                           Therefore thus saith
            the Lord, Inquire among the nations.                      Who hath heard of such
            horrible things as the virgin of Israel hath sedulously done?
       14 Will crags forsake a rock or snow quit Libanus?                                   Or water
       15 turn aside when furiously driven by wind ?                            Because my peo-
            ple have forgotten me—have burned incense to vanity ; they
            will therefore break down the everlasting barriers in their
       16 ways that they may walk in paths having no road for travel-
            ling—that they may make the land a desolation—an everlast-
            ing object of pity.          All that pass through it shall be astonished
       17 and shake their head.               Like a burning wind I will scatter them
            before their enemies.             I will shew them the day of their de-
            struction.
       18        Upon this they said, Come let us settle on account with Je-
            remias.      Because law shall not perish from the priest, nor coun-
            sel from the wise, nor a word from the prophet, Come and
            that we may smite him with the tongue, let us hear all his
            words.
       19        Hear me,           Lord, and hearken to my justification.                       Shall
                 VOL. II.                            3 N
                                                                    "; ;
            XTX.                 JEREMIAS.
        Ch.
        20 evils be returned for good offices?Because they contrived de-
           signs against my life and concealed the punishment they in-
           tended for me. Remember how I stood before thee to intercede
        21 for them—to turn away thy wrath from them.   For this cause
           deliver up their sons to famine and give them up in multitudes
           to the sword. Let their wives become childless and widows
           and the husbands be cut off by pestilence and their young men
        22 fall by the sword in battle.Let a scream be heard in their
           houses. Thou wilt bring robbers suddenly on them because
           they contrived a speech to entrap me and concealed the snares
        23 they had set for me. Thou indeed,    Lord, knewest all their
           designs against me to put me to death.   Absolve them not
           from their wickedness, nor blot out their sins from before thee.
           Let their weakness be before thee.  Deal with them in the
           time of thy wrath.
       XIX.      Then the Lord said to me, Go and get a pitcher of
           earthen ware and thou shalt take out some of the elders of the
        2 people and of the priests and go out to the common grave
           yard which is at the entrance of the gate Charseith and read
          there all these words which I shall speak to thee and thou
          shalt say to them,
        3     Hear the word of the Lord, ye kings of Juda and ye men
          of Juda and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem, and ye who enter in
          at these gates. Thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel, Behold
          I am bringing evils upon this place, so that the ears of every
        4 one whoheareth them shall tingle. Because they have forsaken
          me and profaned this place ; and have burned incense in it to
          strange gods, which neither they nor their fathers knew; and
          the kings of Juda have filled this place with the blood of
        5 innocents ; and have built high places to Baal to burn their sons
          with fire, things which I never commanded, and which never
        6 came into my mind; therefore behold the days are coming,
          saith the Lord, When this place shall no more be called, " The
          end of hope," and " The grave yard of the sons of Ennom ;
        7 but "The grave yard of slaughter."  For I will slaughter the
          council of Juda and the council of Jerusalem in this place
          And cause them to fall by the sword before their enemies, and
          by the hands of them who seek their lives. And I will give their
          carcasses to be meat for the birds of the air and the wild beasts
          XX.                   JEREMIAS.
     Oh.
      8 of the earth, and make this city a desolation and an object of
         pity. Every one who passeth by it shall be sad and express
      9 the sound of pity for the stroke which it hath received.  They
         shall indeed eat the flesh of their sons and the flesh of their
         daughters; and they shall eat, every one, the flesh of his
         neighbour, in the blockade and siege with which their ene-
         mies shall besiege them.
     10     Then thou shalt break the pitcher before the eyes of the
     11 men who went out with thee and say, Thus saith the Lord, So
         will I break this people and this city : as this earthen pitcher
     12 is broken and cannot be mended, so will I do, saith the Lord,
         to this place and to the inhabitants thereof, that this city may
     13 be dashed down like that hopeless vessel.   And the houses of
         the kings of Juda shall be like this hopeless place, because of
         their impurities in all the houses on the tops of which they
         burned incense to all the host of heaven and poured out liba-
         tions to strange gods.
     14     Now when Jeremias returned from the grave yard whither
         the Lord had sent him to prophesy, he stood up in the court
     15 of the house of the Lord and said to all the people, Thus saith
         the Lord, Behold I am bringing upon this city and upon all the
         cities belonging to it and upon all the villages thereof all the
         evils which I have denounced against it, because they have
         hardened their necks so as not to hearken to my command-
     XX.      ments.   Whereupon Paschor son of Emmer, the priest
      2 who was appointed ruler of the house of the Lord, when he heard
         Jeremias prophesying these words, smote him and committed
         him to the prison which was in the upper story of the gate to
      o the house of the Lord.   And when Paschor took Jeremias out
         of prison, Jeremias said to him, He hath not called thy name
      4 Paschor, but Exile.   For thus saith the Lord, Behold I will
         send thee with all thy friends into exile ; and they shall fall by
         the sword of their enemies and thine eyes shall see it. I will
         deliver thee and all Juda into the hands of the king of Baby-
      5 Ion; and they shall be exiled and slain with swords.    And I
         will deliver all the strength of this city and all the labours
         thereof and all the treasures of the king of Juda into the
         hands of his enemies and they shall carry them to Babylon.
      6 And thou and all that dwell in thy house shall go into cap-
           Ck. XXII.                                  JEKEMIAS.
                 tivity and thou shalt die in Babylon and be buried there, thou
                and all thy friends to whom thou hast prophesied falsehoods.
             7        (p) Hast thou,             Lord deceived me ? and have I been deceiv-
                ed ?      Thou hast taken hold and hast prevailed.                            I am become a
                subject of laughter : all the day long I endure reproach.                                      Be-
                cause for my bitter word I am to be derided, shall I appeal to
             8 a breach of covenant and misery? because the word of the
                Lord became a reproach to me—a subject of mockery all the
             9 day long; therefore I said, I will not name the name of the
                Lord—I will not speak any more in his name.                                   But there was
           10 kindled as it were a burning fire in my bones and I became
                dejected and cannot bear it.                     Because I heard the whisper of
                many collected from all around saying, "Join in conspiracy
                and let us all conspire against him                       ye men who are his friends
                                                                       ;
                watch his thoughts ; if he can be deceived, we shall then pre-
           11 vail over him and take our revenge on him."                                      But the Lord
                was with me as a mighty warrior, therefore they persecuted
                and could not contrive.                 They were put to great confusion.
                      Because they had not a due sense of their infamous practi-
           12 ces, which are never to be forgotten ;                                   Lord, who provest
                righteous things, who knowest reins and hearts I might have
                 seen thy vengeance on them.                    For to thee I laid open my cause.
           13 Sing to the Lord ; sing praises to him, because he hath rescu-
           14 ed the soul of the needy out of the hand of evil doers.                                  " Let the
                day be cursed in which I was born—the day in which my mo-
                ther bore me; Let it not be mentioned with expressions of
           15 joy.        Let the man be cursed who brought tidings to my fa-
                ther saying, A male child is borne to thee making him glad.
           16 Let that man be like the cities which the Lord overthrew in
                 wrath and relented not, Let him hear a scream in the morn-
           17 ing and the cry of woe at noon-day, because he did not kill me
                 in the womb, and my mother was not made my grave, and her
           18 womb always with child."                      To what purpose this ?                I came forth
                 from the womb to see labours and sorrows, and my days have
                 been spent in shame.
           XXII.             X.      Thus saith the Lord, Go down to the house of
                 the king of Juda and thou shalt speak there this word and say,
                 Hear a word of the Lord,                    king of Juda, who art seated on the
       XXII.               JEREMIAS.
   Ch.
      throne of David, thou and thy household and thy people and
    3 they who enter in at these gates !Thus saith the Lord, Execute
      judgment and justice and deliver the spoiled out of the hand
      of him who wrongeth him ; and over the stranger and the or-
    4 phan and the widow tyrannise not ; nor be guilty of impiety ; nor
      shed innocent blood in this place.For if you faithfully exe-
      cute this charge, there shall enter in at the gates of this house,
      kings seated on the throne of David and riding in chariots and
    5 on horses, they and their servants and their people.But if you
      will not perform these things, by myself I have sworn, saith
    6 the Lord, This house shall be a desolation.For thus saith the
      Lord against the house of the king of Juda, though thou wert
      to me as Galaad, as the top of Libanus, I will make thee a
    7 desolation, cities uninhabitable.I will indeed bring against
      thee a destroyer, a man with his axe ; and they shall cut down
    8 thy choice cedars and throw them into the fire.And when na-
      tions shall pass by this city, they will say, every one to his
      neighbour, "Why hath the Lord dealt thus with this great
    9 city ? "To which it will be said in reply, " Because they forsook
      the Lord their God and worshipped strange gods and served
      them."
   10     Weep not for him who is dead, nor utter lamentations for
      him, weep bitterly for him who is going away ; for he shall ne-
   11 ver return, nor see any more his native country.For thus saith
      the Lord respecting Sellein son of Josias, who reigned in the
   12 room of his father and who is gone from this place ; he shall not
       return hither any more : but in the place to which I have trans-
      ported him, there he shall die and this land he shall see no more.
   13 With regard to him who is building himself a house, but not
       with righteousness, and lofty stories, but not with justice : he
      useth the service of his neighbour for nothing, and will not
    14 pay him his wages. Thou hast built thyself a well proportion-
       ed house, lofty chambers well fitted with windows, and cieled
    15 with cedar and painted with vermillion.Is it thy desire to be
       made king ? because thou art instigated by thy father Achaz,
       are there not feasts ? are there not entertainments ? better were
    16 it for thee to execute judgment and justice. They did not
       take cognisance, they did not administer justice to the lowly,
       nor decide righteously the cause of the needy, is not this ow-
              XXIII.
         Ch.                         JEEEMIAS.
         17 ing to thy not knowing me ? saitti the Lord.    Behold thine eyes
             are not good, neither is thy heart ; but they are bent upon
             thine inordinate desires and on the shedding of innocent blood,
             and on injustice,' and on murder ; that thou mayst perpetrate
             these things.
         18     Therefore thus saith the Lord respecting Joakim son of
             Josias, king of Juda, even concerning this man, they shall not
            utter for him the lamentation " Alas Brother" nor shall they
         19 bewail him saying, " Alas lord"   He shall be buried with the bu-
             rial of an ass—being blotted out he shall be cast forth without
         20 the gates of Jerusalem.     Ascend Libanus and scream : ascend
             Basan, and shout.   Shout till thy voice reach the sea coast ; for
         21 all thy lovers are destroyed.    I spake to thee respecting thy
             fall ; but thou saidst, " I will not listen."This hath been thy
         22 way from thy youth, thou hast not hearkened to my voice.       All
             thy shepherds shall be fed with wind ; and all thy lovers shall
             go into captivity ; that thou mayst then be ashamed and con-
         23 founded on the account of them who love thee.           inhabitant
             of Lebanon, who hast thy nest in the cedars, thou shalt groan
             bitterly when pangs come upon thee like those of a woman in
         24 travail : as I live saith the Lord though Jechonias may be
             made a son of Joakim, a king of Juda, a signet on my right
         25 hand I will drag thee out thence and deliver thee into the
             hands of them who seek thy life—of them whose countenance
         26 thou dreadest—into the hands of the Chaldeans.         And I will
             cast out thee and the mother who brought thee forth, into a
         27 land where thou wast not born, and there thou shalt die.      Into
         28 the land which their souls long for they shall not return.  Jecho-
             nias is dishonoured like a vessel which is useless, because he
         29 is hurled away and cast into a land which he knew not.
         30 earth, earth, hear a word of the Lord ! record the chieftain him-
             self as a man of low rank, exiled by the voice of a herald ; for
             no increase from his seed shall sit on the throne of David, nor
             any more be chief in Juda.
         XXIII.       XI.   HA! the shepherds are destroying and scatter-
             ing the sheep of their pasture.   Therefore thus saith the Lord
           2 to the shepherds of my people, You have scattered my fluck
             and driven them away and have not watched them ; behold I
           3 will punish you according to your malignant doings.       And I
                                                                                                                                                     :
         Ck. XXIII.                                              JBEEMIAS.
                will gather the remains of my people in every land whither I
                have driven them and bring them back to their own pasture
           4 and they shall increase and multiply.                                                And I will raise up shep-
                herds for them who will feed them.                                           And they shall no more be
                terrified nor affrighted, saith the Lord.
           5           Behold the days are coming, saith the Lord, when I will
                raise up for David a righteous shoot, who shall reign king and
           6 understand and execute judgment and justice on the earth. In his
                days Juda shall be saved and Israel shall dwell securely.                                                                    And
                the name which the Lord will give him by the prophets shall
                be Josedek [Lord of righteousness.]
           9           (p)        My heart within me was broken.                                              All my bones qui-
                vered.           I was like a man sore bruised and like a man staggering
                with wine, at the presence of the Lord, and at the comeli-
         10 ness of his glory ; because on account of them the land mourn-
                ed and the pastures of the wilderness were parched up—be-
                cause their course was bad and suitably thereto their strength.
         11             (J)        Because priest and prophet are polluted, and in my
         12 house I have seen their wickedness ; let their way therefore be
                slippery and dark, that they may stumble and fall therein.                                                                     For
                I will bring evils upon them in the year of their visitation.
         13 Among the prophets of Samaria I saw indeed unlawful do-
                ings—they prophesied in the name of Baal and led my people
         11: Israel astray : but among the prophets of Jerusalem I saw hor-
                rible things—some committing adultery, and some walking in
                lies, and some strengthening the hands of the multitude, that
                none might turn from his evil way.                                                  To me they are all be-
                come like Sodom, and the inhabitants thereof like Gomorra
         15 therefore thus saith the Lord, Behold I will feed them with
                wormwood, and give them the water of gall to drink.                                                                   Because
                from the prophets of Jerusalem pollution has gone forth
         16 through all the land, thus saith the Lord Almighty, Hearken
                 not to the words of these prophets ; for they contrive for them-
                 selves a foolish vision : they speak from their own hearts and
          17 not from the mouth of the Lord.                                                  They say to them who re-
                 ject the word of the Lord, "You shall have peace."                                                                   Even to
                 all who are walking by their own desires, and to every one
                 walking in the error of his own heart they say, " Evils shall not
          18 come upon thee.                            For which of them hath stood in the council
            XXTIT.              JEREMIAS.
        Oh.
           of tlie Lord and seen ? who hath hearkened and heard his
        19 voice ? "Behold a tempest from the Lord and wrath like a hur-
           ricane is issuing forth : it will come like a whirlwind upon the
        20 wicked; and from the purpose of his heart the wrath of the
           Lord will not turn away ; until it hath executed it ; and until he
           hath established it.Inthe last of these days they shall perceive
        21 this. I did not send these prophets, but they ran of themselves ;
        22 I did not speak to them, yet they prophesied.Now had they
           stood in the firm belief of me and heard my word, they might
        23 have turned my people from their wicked pursuits.I am God
        24 when near, saith the Lord ; and am I not God when far off?
           Can any one hide himself in secret places ; and I not see him ?
        25 Do I not fill the heaven and the earth ? saith the Lord.I have
           heard what these prophets speak—what they prophesy in my
        26 name, saying falsely, "I have dreamed a dream." How long
           shall it be in the heart of these prophets, who prophesy lies,
        27 that by prophesying the desires of their own hearts—they may
           count upon causing my name to be forgotten, by their dreams
           which they tell, every one to his neighbour; as their fathers
        28 forgot my name by using Baal ? Let the prophet, who hath a
           dream, tell his dream : and let him, to whom my word cometh,
           declare it with truth.Why is the chaff added to the wheat ?Is
        29 not this the case with my words ? saith the Lord.Behold are
           not my words like fire ? saith the Lord ; and like a sledge which
        30 breaketh a rock?  Therefore behold I am against those pro-
           phets, saith the Lord, who steal my words every one from his
        31 neighbour.  Behold I am against those prophets, who belch
           forth prophesies of the tongue and drowse their dozy drows-
        32 ings : therefore behold I am against those prophets who prophe-
           sy false dreams.Have they not told them and led my people
           astray by their lies and their errors ?As for me, I neither sent
           them nor commanded them ; therefore they cannot in any wise
        33 benefit this people.Now if this people or a priest or a prophet
           should ask, " What is the burden of the Lord ? "Thou shalt
           say to them, " You are that burden and I will cast you off, saith
        34 the Lord." As for the prophet and the priests and the people
           who say, " The burden of the Lord ; " I will punish that man
        35 and his house.Thus you shall say every one to his neighbour
           and every one to his brother, " What hath the Lord answered,"
                                                                                                                                     ;
                                                            JEKEMIAS.
         Ch. XXYI.
         36 and, "What hath the Lord spoken."                                            So mention no more the
               burden of the Lord : since every man's word shall be his bur-
         37 den.           "But why hath the Lord our God spoken?"                                                     For this
         38 cause, saith the Lord our God, because you have used this ex-
               pression, " The Burden of the Lord," though I sent to you say-
         39 ing, You shall not say, "The Burden of the Lord."                                                             There-
               fore behold I will take and dash down you and this city which
         40 I gave to you and your fathers; and I will bring upon you
               everlasting reproach, and everlasting dishonour which shall
               not be forgotten.
         XXVI.                 XII.         In the beginning of the reign of Joakim son
               of Josias, this word came from the Lord.
           2          Thus saith the Lord, Stand in the court of the house of
               the Lord and thou shalt solemnly pronounce to all the Jews
               and to all who come to worship in the house of the Lord all
               the words which I have commanded thee to prophesy to them
           3 keep not back a word.                             Perhaps they may hearken and turn
               every one from his evil way, that I may refrain from all the
               evils which I am resolving to do to them, because of their
           4:  wicked pursuits.                   And thou shalt say, Thus saith the Lord,
               Unless you hearken to me so as to walk by the ordinances
           5 which I have set before you; and hearken to the words of my
               servants the prophets, whom I send to you, whom I, rising
               early, have sent to you, though you have not hearkened to them ;
           6 I will make this house like Selo ; and this city I will make a
               curse for all the nations of the whole earth.
           7          So the priests and the false prophets and all the people
               heard Jeremias pronouncing these words in the house of the
           8 Lord.           And when Jeremias had done speaking all that the
               Lord had commanded him to deliver to all the people ; the
               priests and the false prophets and all the people seized him,
           9 saying, Thou shalt be put to death, because thou hast prophe-
               sied in the name of the Lord saying, "This house shall be
               like Selo, and this city shall be desolate, without inhabitants."
               And all the people were assembled against Jeremias in the
         10 house of the Lord.                        When the chiefs of Juda heard the affair,
               they went up from the king's house to the house of the Lord
         11 and sat down in the vestibule of the new gate.                                              And the priests
               and the false prophets addressed the chiefs, and said to all the
                     VOL. II.                                         3 o
            XXYI.                 JEREMIAS.
       Ch.
           people, Let sentence of death pass on this man, because he
           hath prophesied against this city as you have heard with your
        12 ears.  Whereupon Jeremias addressing the chiefs, spoke to
           all the people saying, The Lord hath sent me to prophesy
           against this house and against this city, all the words which
        13 you have heard.    Now therefore amend your ways and your
           doings, and hearken to the voice of the Lord ; and the Lord
           will refrain from all the evils which he hath denounced against
        14 you.   As for me, behold I am in your hands.    Do with me as
        15 seemeth good and best to you.      But be assured that if you
           put me to death, you bring innocent blood on yourselves and
           upon this city and upon the inhabitants thereof.   For in truth,
            the Lord hath sent me to you to speak all these words in your
            hearing.
        16     Then the chiefs and all the people said to the priests and
            the false prophets, This man is not liable to death, for he hath
        17 spoken to us in the name of the Lord.       And there stood up
            some principal men of the elders of the land, and said to all
        18 the assembly of the people, Michaias the Morasthite lived in
            the days of Ezekias king of Juda, and he said to all the peo-
            ple of Juda, "Thus said the Lord, Sion shall be ploughed
            like a field ; and Jerusalem shall be a desolation ; and the moun-
         19 tain of this house, a grove of a forest : " but did Ezekias and
            all Juda put him to death ? No. Because they feared the Lord ;
            and because they intreated the favour of the Lord : therefore
            the Lord refrained from the evils which he had denounced
            against them.   Now as for us, we have committed great evils
            against our souls.
         20     Now there was a man who prophesied in the name of the
            Lord, namely Ourias son of Samaias of Kariathiarim ; and he
            prophesied against this land according to all the words of
         21 Jeremias.   And when king Joakim and all the chiefs heard
            all his words, and sought to kill him and Ourias heard it, he
         22 fled to Egypt.  And the king sent men to Egypt, who fetched
         23 him out thence and brought him to the king; and he slew
            him with the sword and threw him into the common grave
         24 yard.  But the hand of Achikam son of Saphan was with Je-
            remias that they should not deliver him up into the hands of
            the people, nor kill him.
    Ch. XXV.                 JEEEMIAS.
    XXV.      XIII.  THE word which came to Jeremias concern-
       ing all the people of Jnda in the fourth year of Joakim son of
     2 Josias king of Juda, which he spoke to all the people of Juda
       and to all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying,
     3    (J)  From the thirteenth year of Josias son of Amos king
       of Juda even to this day, for three and twenty years I have
       spoken to you rising early and speaking : and I have sent to
       you my servants the prophets; rising early and sending them,
     5 though you have not hearkened nor inclined your ears ; say-
       ing, Turn ye every one from his evil way, and from your
       wicked pursuits and you shall dwell in this land, which I gave
     6 to you and your fathers from age to age.Go not after strange
       gods to serve them, and worship them, that you may not provoke
     7 me by the works of your hands to bring evils upon you.But you
     8 hearkened not to me.  Therefore thus saith the Lord, Since you
       have not believed my words, behold I am sending, and I will
       take a family from the north and bring them against this land and
       against the inhabitants thereof and against all the nations
     9 around it. And I will lay them waste and make them a deso-
    10 lation and an object of pity and an everlasting reproach.And I
       will destroy from among them the sound of joy and the sound
       of gladness ; the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of
    11 the bride ; the odour of myrrh and the light of the lamp.And
       the whole country shall be a desolation. And they shall be
    12 slaves among the nations seventy years.  And when the se-
       venty years are compleated I will execute vengeance on that
    13 nation, and make them an everlasting desolation.I will indeed
       bring against that land all these words of mine which I have
       spoken against it—all the things which are written in this
       book which Jeremias prophesied against the nations, in the
    14 manner the Lord, the God of Israel said, "Take this cup of
       wine—this strong wine from my hand, and thou shalt make
    16 all the nations, to which I send thee, drink it.And they shall
       drink and vomit and rave, because of the sword which I send
     17 among them.  So I took the cup out of the hand of the Lord
        and made all the nations drink to which the Lord sent me,
        namely Jerusalem, and the cities of Juda, and the kings of Ju-
        da, and his chiefs, to make them a desolation and a waste and
     19 an object of pity ; also Pharao king of Egypt and his servants
                                                                                                                              ;;:
                    XXY.                                   JEREMIAS.
             Ch.
                  and his nobles and all his people ; and all the mixed people
             20 and all the kings of the Philistines, (namely Ascalon and Gaza
             21 and Akkaron and the remnant of Azotus;) and Idumea and
             22 Moab and the children of Ammon; and the kings of Tyre
                   and the kings of Sidon ; and the kings on the border of the
             23 sea ; and Daidan and Thaiman and Ros, and all that had their
             24 foreheads shaven; and all the mixed people who dwell in the
             25 desert; and all the kings of Ailam and all the kings of the
             26 Persians and all the kings north of the sun, far and near, every
                  one adjoining his brother, even all the kingdoms on the face
            27 of the earth.                 And thou shalt say to them, Thus said the
                  Lord Almighty, Drink and be drunk, and you shall vomit,
                  and fall and rise no more because of the sword which I send
                  among you.
            28          And if they refuse to take the cup out of thy hand to drink,
                  then thou shalt say, Thus saith the Lord, You shall drink it
             29 for in the city which is called by my name I am beginning to
                  inflict calamity and with purification you shall not be purified
                  for I am calling for a sword against all the inhabitants of the
             30 earth. Therefore thou shalt prophesy against them all these words
                  and say ; The Lord from on high will solemnly pronounce sen-
                  tence from his sanctuary ; he will utter his voice—in his place
                   he will utter a triumphant shout and some like the treaders of
                  grapes will answer.                 When destruction hath come on the inha-
             31 bitants of this land—upon a part of the earth; because the
                  Lord hath a controversy with the nations, he will come to
                  judgment with all flesh ; and the wicked shall be given up to the
             32 sword, saith the Lord.                      Thus saith the Lord, Behold evils are
                  coming from nation to nation.                             A mighty tempest is issuing
             33 forth from the extremity of the earth, and the slain of the
                  Lord shall be in the day of the Lord from one end of the
                  earth to the other.                  They shall not be buried.                        They shall be
            34 for dung on the face of the earth.                                 Raise the mournful cry, ye
                  shepherds ; utter loud moans and lamentations, ye rams of the
                  flock ;      for the days for your slaughter are accomplished, and
            35 ye shall fall like choice rams ; and the shepherds shall have no
            36 way to flee, nor the rams of the flock to escape.                                      Hark! a sound
                  of the shepherds' screaming ! and a doleful bleating of the
                  sheep and the rams !                  For the Lord hath utterly destroyed their
                                                                                                                          ;
               XXXVI.                                 JEKEMIAS.
       Ch.
       37 pastures and because of his fierce anger he will put an end to
       38 the remains of peace.                       Like a lion he hath quitted his covert
             therefore their land is become a trackless desert by reason of
             the mighty sword.
       XXXVI. XIV. IN the fourth year of Joakim son of Josias
             king of Juda, a word of the Lord came to me, saying, Take
             thee a roll of a book and write therein all the words which I
         2 have spoken to thee against Jerusalem and against Juda and
             against all the nations from the day I first spoke to thee—from
         3 the days of Josias king of Juda even to this day.                                           Perhaps the
             house of Juda will hear all the evils which I purpose to do to
             them, that they may turn from their evil way and that I may
         4 be merciful to their iniquities and their sins.                                     Thereupon Jere-
             mias sent for Baruch, son of Nerias, and he wrote in a book,
             from the mouth of Jeremias, all the words which the Lord had
         5 spoken to him.                  Then Jeremias gave a charge to Baruch, say-
             ing, I am watched so that I cannot go to the house of the Lord ;
         6 therefore thou shalt read from this roll in the hearing of the
             people in the house of the Lord on the fast day, even in the
             hearing: of all Juda who come from their cities thou shalt read
         7 to them.            Perhaps they may find favour in the sight of the Lord
             and turn from their evil way, for great is the wrath and the
             anger of the Lord which he hath denounced against this peo-
             ple.
         8         So Baruch did according to all that Jeremias commanded
             him, that he might read from the book the words of the Lord
         9 in the house of the Lord.                      And it came to pass that in the eighth
             year of the reign of Joakim, in the ninth month, all the people
             in Jerusalem and the house of Juda kept a solemn fast before
       10 the Lord.              And Baruch read from the book the words of Jere-
             mias in the house of the Lord in the house of Gamarias son of
             Saphan the scribe, in the upper court at the vestibule of the
             new gate of the house of the Lord and in the hearing of all the
       11 people.            And when Michaias son of Gamarias son of Saphan
             heard all the words of the Lord from the book, he went down
       12 to the king's house, to the house of the secretary ; and lo ! all
             the chiefs were there in council, namely, Elisama the secretary,
             and Dalias son of Selemias, and Jonathan son of Achobar and
        Ch. XXXVI.                  JEKEMIAS.
            Gamarias son of Saphan and Sedekias son of Ananias and all
        13 the chiefs.  And when Michaias told them all the words which
            he had heard, which Baruch read in the hearing of the people,
            all the chiefs sent Judin son of Xathanias son of Selemias, son
        14 of Ohusi to Baruch, saying, Take in thy hand the roll thou art
            reading to the people and come.    Accordingly Baruch took the
        15 roll and went down to them.      And they said to him, Kead it
        16 again to us.   So Baruch read it.  And when they had heard all
            the words, they consulted, and said one to another, We must
        17 certainly inform the king of all these words.    Then they ques-
            tioned Baruch and said, Where didst thou write all these words ?
        18 And Baruch said, From his mouth.      Jeremias dictated to me all
        19 these words and I wrote them in a book.        Then they said to
            Baruch, Go and hide, both thou and Jeremias and let no man
        20 know where you are.     Then they went to court to the king, but
            left the roll in safe keeping in the house of Elisamas and they
        21 told the king all the words.   And the king sent Judin for the
            book.  And Judin having brought it from the house of Elisa-
            mas read it in the hearing of the king and in the hearing of all
            the chiefs who were standing round the king.
        22     Now the king was sitting in the winter house and there
        23 was a grate with fire in it before him.    So as Judin read three
            or four folds, he cut them off with the secretary's knife and
        24 threw them into the fire in the grate, till the whole roll was
            consumed in the fire.   But neither the king nor his servants,
            who heard all these words, made any inquiry nor rent their
        25 clothes.   Nay Elnathan and Godolias suggested to the king to
        26 burn the roll.   Then the king commanded Jeremeel the king's
            son and Saraias son of Esriel to apprehend Baruch and Jere-
            mias.  But they had hid themselves.
         27     And after the king had burned the roll—all the words
            which Baruch had written from the mouth of Jeremias, a word
         28 of the Lord came to Jeremias, saying, Take thee another roll
            and write all the words which were in that roll which king
            Joakim hath burned, and thou shalt say, Thus saith the Lord,
         29 Thou hast burned that roll, saying, " Why hast thou written
            therein and said the king of Babylon shall surely come and lay
            waste this land, so that neither man nor beast shall be left there-
         30 in ; " therefore thus said the Lord respecting Joakim king of
    XXXY.                       JEREMIAS.
        Juda, He shall not have one to sit on the throne of David ; and
        his carcass shall be exposed to the heat of the day and to the
    31 frost of the night : and I will keep a watch upon him and npon
        his family and upon his servants and bring upon him and
        upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem and upon the land of Juda
        all the evils which I have denounced against them and to
        which they have not hearkened.
    32      So Baruch took another roll and wrote thereon from the
        mouth of Jeremias all the words of the book which Joakim
        had burned and to it were added more words similar to them.
     XXXV. XV. The word which came to Jeremias from the
      2 Lord in the days of Joakim king of Juda, saying, Go to the fa-
        mily of Archabin and thou shalt bring them to the house of the
      3 Lord, into one of the courts, and give them wine to drink.   Ac-
        cordingly I brought Jechonias son of Jeremin son of Chaba-
        sin with his brethren and his sons, even all the family of Archa-
      4 bin, and took them into the house of the Lord, to the chamber
        of the sons of Jonan son of Ananias son of Godolias, a man of
        Grod, which is near the house of the chiefs who are above the
      5 house of Maasias son of Seloni, the keeper of the court.    And
        having set before them a pot of wine and drinking cups, I said,
      6 drink wine.   Thereupon they said, We must not drink wine.
        For Jonadab son of Eechab our father gave us a charge, say-
        ing, You shall not drink wine ; neither you nor your sons for-
      7 ever ; neither shall you build houses, nor sow seed, nor have a
        vineyard ; for you shall dwell in tents all your days, that you
      8 may live many days in the land where you sojourn.        Accord-
        ingly we have hearkened to the voice of Jonadab our father
        so as not to drink wine all our days, neither Ave nor our
      9 wives, nor our sons nor our daughters ; and we have not
     10 built houses here to live in, nor have we vineyard, or field or
         seed ; but have dwelt in tents and have hearkened and done ac-
     11 cording to all that our father Jonadab commanded us.     So when
         Nabuchodonosar came up against the land, we determined
         upon coming and came to Jerusalem out of the way of the ar-
         my of the Chaldeans and out of the way of the army of the
         Assyrians, and here we have made our abode.
           9                                                                    —;
               XXIII. XXIV.            JEREMIAS.
          Ch.
          12     Upon this a word of the Lord came to me, saying, Thus
          13 saith the Lord, Go and say to the men of Juda and to the inha-
              bitants of Jerusalem, Will you never receive instruction to
          14 hearken to my words ?      The children of Jonadab son of Rechab
              have stedfastly observed the command which he gave them
             not to drink wine : and they have not drunk any.          But I have
             spoken to you, rising early; and you have not hearkened.
          15 Though I have sent to you my servants the prophets ; saying,
             Turn ye, every one from his evil way, and amend your doings,
              and go not after strange gods to serve them, and you shall
          16 dwell in the land which I gave to you and your fathers; yet
             you have not inclined your ears nor hearkened.           The sons of
             Jonadab son of Rechab have stedfastly observed the command
             of their father ; but this people have not hearkened to me.
          17 Therefore thus saith the Lord, Behold I will bring upon Ju-
             da and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem all the evils which I
          18 have denounced against them.        Therefore thus saith the Lord,
             Seeing the sons of Jonadab son of Rechab have obeyed the
          1  command of their father and have clone as he ordered them
             there shall never be wanting a man of the sons of Jonadab son
             of Rechab to stand before me all the days of this land.
          XXIII. 40 XVI. BECAUSE of this prophesy (ch. 16, v. 14, 15)
             " Behold the days are coming, saith the Lord, When they shall
             no more say, "As the Lord liveth who brought up the house
             of Israel, out of the land of Egypt," but, "As the Lord liveth
             who gathered all the seed of Israel from the land of the north
             and from all the countries whither he had driven them and re-
          XXIV. established them in their own land" the Lord shewed
             me two baskets of figs set before the temple of the Lord, after
             Nabuchodonosar the king of Babylon had carried away Je-
             chonias son of Joakim king of Juda and the chiefs and the ar-
             tisans and the prisoners of war and the rich men from Jerusa-
           2 lem and brought them to Babylon.          The one was a basket of
             very fine figs, such as are first ripe ; and the other was a bas-
           3 ket of very bad figs, so bad that they could not be eaten.       And
             the Lord said to me, What seest thou, Jeremias ?         And I said,
             Figs.   The good figs, very good : and the bad figs, very bad
           5 so bad, that they cannot be eaten.       Then a word of the Lord
                                                                                                                ;!
             XXX.
      Ch.                                        JEREMIAS.
           caine to rne saying, Thus saith the Lord the God of Israel,
           Like these good figs so will I acknowledge for good those ba-
           nished Jews whom I have sent from this place to the land of
        6 the Chaldeans.              And I will fix mine eyes upon them for good
           and re-establish them in this land for good.                               And I will build
        7 them up and not pull them down : and I will plant them and
           not root them up : and I will give them a heart to know me,
           that I am the Lord : and they shall be my people, and I will
           be their God ; for they will turn to me with their whole heart.
        8        But like those bad figs which for their badness cannot be
           eaten, thus saith the Lord, So will I deliver up Zedekias king
           of Juda and his nobles and the remnant of Jerusalem—them
        9 who are left in this land and them who dwell in Egypt.                                       Them
            indeed I will devote to dispersion in all the kingdoms of the
            earth ; and they shall be for a reproach and for a by-word and
            for a taunt and a curse in every place whither I shall drive
      10 them.          And I will send against them famine and pestilence and
            the sword, until they are utterly consumed from this land
            which I gave them.
      XXX. XVII.                   THE word which came from the Lord to Jere-
            mias, to wit.
        2        Thus spake the Lord the God of Israel, saying, Write all
        3 the words which I have delivered to thee in a book : for be-
            hold the days are coming saith the Lord when I will bring
            back the captivity of my people Israel and Juda, said the Lord
            and I will bring them to this land, which I gave to their fa-
            thers and they shall rule over it.
        4         Now these are the words which the Lord spake concern-
        5 ing Israel and Juda.                   Thus said the Lord, You shall hear the
         6 sound of terror.              It is terror and not peace.                  Inquire and see
            Hath a male ever brought forth ?                       Now with respect to the ter-
            ror, in which they will hold their loins, it is indeed for a de-
            liverance.
                  (p) Why then have I seen every man with his hands on
            his loins ?        Their faces are turned to paleness.
         7        (J) It is because that great day is come which is unparal-
            leled.      It is indeed a distressful time to Jacab, but by this he
         8 shall be saved.              In that day, saith the Lord, I will break the
                  VOL. II.                              3 p
                                                                                                                                                                               :;;:
                             XXXI.                                                 JEREMIAS.
                   Ch.
                           yoke from their neck, and burst their bonds asunder ; and they
                      9 shall no more work for strangers.                                                     But they must work for the
                           Lord their God and I will raise up for them David their king.
                   12              Thus said the Lord, I raised up affliction ; thy wound was
                   13 grievous ; there is none to plead thy cause ; the attempts to
                   14 cure thee increased thy pain ; there is no relief for thee ; all
                           thy friends forgot thee ; they would make no inquiry for thee ;
                           because I inflicted on thee the wound of an enemy, a severe
                           chastisement for all thine iniquity ; thy sins had multiplied
                   16 therefore all that devour thee shall be devoured, and all thine
                           enemies shall eat their own flesh.                                                    For the multitude of thine
                           iniquities (thy sins indeed were multiplied) they have done all
                           these things to thee ; but they who plunder thee shall be for
                           plunder ; and all who have preyed upon thee, I will give for a
                   17 prey.                 Because I will bring up the cure for thee I will cure
                           thee, saith the Lord, of thy painful wound ; because thou wast
                           called the Outcast, the hunt is up after thee ; because there is
                   18 none who seeketh this outcast, thus saith the Lord, Behold I
                           myself will bring back the outcast of Jacob, and his captivity
                           I will compassionate. And the city shall be rebuilt on its height
                    19 and the people shall sit for the administration of justice.                                                                                     And
                           from them shall come forth singers—the sound of the sportive ;
                   20 and I will multiply them and they shall not be diminished. And
                            their sons shall come in as in former times ; and their judicato-
                            ries shall be established in my presence. And I will punish them
                    21 who afflict them.                                 His own mighties shall preside over them
                            and from him his own chief shall come forth ; and he will ga-
                            ther them that they may return to me—that he who hath given
                            his heart, whoever he is, may return to me, saith the Lord.                                                                                  Be-
                    23 cause the anger of the Lord hath gone forth—hath gone forth
                            a furious anger, it will come whirling on the wicked—the fierce
                    XXXI. anger of the Lord will not turn back, till he hath done—till
                            he hath executed the purpose of his heart. In the latter days you
                            will know these things.
                       1            At that time, said the Lord, I will be the God of the fami-
                            ly of Israel and they shall be my people.
                       2             Thus said the Lord, I found him warm in the wilderness
                             among them who had perished by the sword.                                                                         Go : you shall
                       3 not destroy Israel.                                The Lord from afar hath appeared for him
               XXXI.                                      JEEEMIAS
       Ch.
             with everlasting love I have loved thee ; therefore I have drawn
         4 thee into compassion.                          For I will rebuild thee, and thou shalt
             be rebuilt.                  virgin of Israel, again thou shalt take thy tim-
             brel, and go forth with a congregation of rejoicers.                                              As you have
         6 planted vineyards on the mountains of Samaria, plant and
             sing praises ; for there shall be a day of invitation to them
             who make apologies on the mountains of Ephraim, "Arise
         7 and go up to Sion to the Lord your God."                                                       For thus said
             the Lord to Jacob, Rejoice and shout at the head of na-
             tions         issue proclamations and sing praises                                        say, " The Lord
                       ;                                                                           ;
         8 hath saved his people, the remnant of Israel."                                                   Behold I will
             bring them from the north and gather them from the extremi-
             ty of the earth.                At the festival of Phasek he shall have a multi-
         9 tude of children who shall return hither.                                               They set out with
             weeping ; but I will bring them up with consolation, causing
             them to rest at fountains of water in a straight road ; and in it
             they shall not be led astray, for I am become a father to Israel,
       10 and Ephraim is my first born.                                    Hear the words of the Lord, ye
             nations ! and proclaim them to the far distant isles.                                                    Say, He,
             who scattered Israel, will gather them, and guard them as a
       11 shepherd doth his flock.                              Because the Lord hath redeemed Ja-
             cob—hath rescued him out of the hand of them who were
       12 stronger than he ; therefore they shall come and rejoice on
             mount Sion.                They shall indeed come to the good things of the
             Lord—to a land of corn and wine, and of fruits and herds and
             flocks ; and their soul shall be like a fruitful tree ; and they shall
       13 no more be hungry.                            Then shall virgins rejoice in the assembly
             of youths ; the elders also shall be filled with joy ; for I will turn
       14 their mourning into joy and make them glad.                                                      I will enlarge
             and satisfy the soul of the priests the sons of Levi.                                                    And my
             people shall be regaled with my good things.
       15           Thus said the Lord, There was heard at Kama a sound of
             lamentation and weeping and wailing—Rachel, weeping for her
             children, refused to be comforted, because they are no more.
       16           Thus saith the Lord, Let thy voice refrain from lamenta-
             tion and thine eyes from tears.                                  For there is a reward for thy
       17 works and they shall return from the enemies' land.                                                      It is firin-
       18 ly established for thy children.                                       I have heard the voice of
              Ephraim moaning, "Thou hast chastised me and I have been
              Ch. XXXI.                                     JEREMIAS.
                    chastised.          I like a bullock was uninstructed, bring me back
              19 that I may return ; for thou art the Lord my God. For after my
                    captivity I reformed and after I gained knowledge I groaned
                    for my days of shame and shewed thee that I was ashamed of
              20 my youth."                  Ephraim is a beloved son—my darling child
                                                                                                                                ;
                    since my words are in him I will surely remember him.                                                 For
                    this cause I have been anxious for him, I will surely have
                    mercy upon him, saith the Lord.                               Establish thyself,                   Sion
                                                                                                                                ;
                    take revenge—rouse up thy courage.                                   By the way thou went-
                    est return,             virgin of Israel—return to thy cities,                                  mourn-
              22 er.        How long shall it be, ere thou wilt return,                                            despised
                    daughter !           Since the Lord hath created safety for a new plan-
                    tation, with safety men may walk about.                                    For thus saith the
              23 Lord, Again they shall use this form of words in the land of
                    Juda and in his cities when I have brought back his captivity,
              24 " Blessed be the Lord on his righteous, his holy mountain."                                                 It
                    shall be used by them who dwell in the cities of Juda and in all
                    his land, and shall be repeated by the husbandman and among
              25 the flocks.              For I have satisfied with drink every thirsty soul
                                                                                                                                ;
                    and every soul that was hungry I have filled.
              26'         (p) Upon this I awoke and beheld and my sleep was sweet
                    to me.
              27          Therefore behold the days are coming, saith the Lord,
                    when I will sow Israel and Juda with the seed of man and the
              28 seed of beast.                And it shall be, that as I watched over them to
                    pull down and waste, so I will watch over them to build up
              29 and plant, saith the Lord. In those days they shall no more say,
                    " Our fathers ate a sour grape and the childrens' teeth are set on
              30 edge."            But every one shall die for his own sin.                                And whoever
              31 eateth the sour grape, his teeth shall be set on edge. Behold the
                    days are coming, saith the Lord, when I will make a new co-
              32 venant with the house of Israel and the house of Juda.                                             Not ac-
                    cording to the covenant which I made with their fathers on the
                    day when I took them by the hand to bring them out of the
                    land of Egypt.               Because they did not abide by this covenant of
               33 mine, therefore I took no care of them.                                       For this, saith the
                    Lord, is my covenant which I will make with the house of
                    Israel ; after those days, saith the Lord, I will adapt my laws
                     to their understanding and write them on their hearts, and I
    Ch. XXVII.               JEREMIAS.
    34 will be their God and they shall be my people.And they shall
       no more teach every man his neighbour, and every man his
       brother, saying, Know the Lord ; for all will know me from the
       greatest to the least of them : for I will be merciful to their
       iniquities and no more remember their sins.
    37    Though the heaven is exalted very high, saith the Lord,
       and the surface of the earth is depressed far below, yet I will
       not reject the race of Israel, saith the Lord, for all that they
    35 have done, Thus said the Lord who hath given the sun to en-
       lighten the day and the moon and stars to enlighten the night,
       and hath caused the sea to roar and its billows to resound, the
    36 Lord Almighty is his name ; If these laws cease to operate
       in my presence, saith the Lord, then may the race of Israel
       cease from being a nation before me forever.
    38    Behold days are coming, saith the Lord, when a city shall
       be built to the Lord from the tower of Anameel to the gate of
    39 the corner; and the diameter thereof shall extend forward as
       far as the hills of Gareb : and it shall be enclosed around with
    40 choice stones ; and all the Asaremoth as far as Nachal Kedron,
       even to the corner of the horse gate eastward shall be dedicated
       to the Lord, and it shall no more fail nor shall it be demolish-
       ed until the age.
    XXVII.      XVIII.    2  THUS said the Lord, Make thee
       chains and yokes and put them about thy neck ; and thou shalt
       send them to the king of Idumea and to the king of Moab and
       to the king of the Ammonites and to the king of Tyre and to
       the king of Sidon by the hands of their ambassadors, who are
     4 coming to meet those sent to Jerusalem to Sedekias king of
       Juda : and thou shalt charge them to say to their masters,
          Thus said the Lord, the God of Israel, Thus shall you say
     5 to your masters, As I have made the earth by my great power
       and by my outstretched arm, I can give it to whom it seem-
     6 eth good in mine eyes.  I have given this land to Xabuchodo-
       nosar king of Babylon to serve him, and the beasts of the field
     8 to work for him.  And the nation and the kingdom—all who
       will not submit their neck to the yoke of the king of Babylon,
       them I will visit with sword and famine, said the Lord, until
     9 they are consumed by his hand. Therefore hearken not to your
           XXVIII.              JEREMIAS.
       Ch.
          false prophets, nor to them who divine or dream for yon, nor
       10 to yonr augnrers, nor your sorcerers who say, Yon shall not
          serve the king of Babylon ; for they prophesy lies to yon to re-
       11 move you far from your land. But the nation which shall sub-
          mit its neck to the yoke of the king of Babylon and work for
          him, that nation I will leave in its own hand.It laboureth for
          him and it shall dwell therein.
       12    So I spoke to Sedekias king of Juda according to all these
          words, saying, Submit your neck to work for the king of Ba-
       15 bylon. For these men prophesy falsehoods to you ; for I have
          not sent them, saith the Lord. They indeed prophesy in my
          name for falsehood to destroy you ; therefore you shall be de-
          stroyed, both you and your prophets who prophesy to you for
       16 unjust falsehood.To you and to all this people and to the
          priests I have spoken, saying, Thus said the Lord, Hearken
          not to the words of those prophets who prophesy to you say-
          ing, "Behold the vessels of the house of the Lord shall be
       17 brought back from Babylon."   For they prophesy falsities to
       18 you. I have not sent them.If they are prophets ; if the word of
          the Lord is in them, let them meet me.  For thus saith the
          Lord, Even the residue of the vessels which the king of Baby-
          lon did not take when he carried away Jechonias from Jerusa-
          lem, shall go to Babylon, saith the Lord.
       XXVIII.      Again it came to pass in the fourth year of Sedeki-
          as king of Juda, in the fifth month, that Ananias son of Azor,
          the false prophet from Gabaon spoke to me in the house of the
        2 Lord, in the presence of the priests and of all the people,
          saying, Thus said the Lord, I have broken the yoke of the
        3 king of Babylon—yet two years of days and I will bring back
          to this place the vessels of the house of the Lord, and Jecho-
        4 nias and the captives of Juda ; for I have broken the yoke of
        5 the king of Babylon.  Thereupon Jeremias said to Ananias in
          the presence of all the people and in the presence of the priests
        6 who were standing in the house of the Lord, " May the Lord
          indeed do so, said Jeremias ; may he establish the word which
          thou hast spoken, by bringing back the vessels of the house of
        7 the Lord and all the captives from Babylon to this place.Ne-
          vertheless hear ye the word of the Lord, which I speak in your
        8 hearing and in the hearing of all the people.There have been
               XXIX.                                       JEEEMIAS.
        Ch.
             prophets of old before ine, and before you, who have prophesied
          9 of war against many a land and against great kingdoms. As for
              the prophet who hath prophesied peace ; when his word com-
              eth to pass let the people acknowledge him as a prophet whom
        10 the Lord hath indeed sent to them."                                     Then in the presence of
              all the people, Ananias took the yokes from the neck of Jere-
        11 mias and broke them.                         And Ananias spoke before all the peo-
              ple, saying, " Thus said the Lord, So will I break the yoke of
              the king of Babylon from the necks of all the nations."                                            So Je
             remias went his way.
        12          And there came a word of the Lord to Jeremias, after Ana-
              nias had broken the yokes from his neck, saying, "Go and
        13 speak to Ananias and say, Thus said the Lord, Thou hast bro-
              ken wooden yokes ; but instead of them I will make yokes of
        14 iron.         For thus said the Lord, I have put an iron yoke on the
              neck of all the nations, that they may work for the king of Ba-
        15 bylon."            Then Jeremias said to Ananias, the Lord hath not sent
        16 thee ; and thou hast made this people trust in a lie.                                             For this
              cause thus saith the Lord, " Behold I send thee from the face
        17 of the earth.              This very year thou shalt die."                         So he died in the
              seventh month.
        XXIX.               Now these are the words of the letter which Jeremias
              sent from Jerusalem to the elders of the captivity and to the
              priests and to the false prophets.—After the departure of king
              Jechonias and of the queen and the chamberlains and of every
          2 nobleman and prisoner of war and artificer from Jerusalem [I
              sent] to Babylon by the hand of Eleason son of Saphan and of
          3 Gamarias son of Chelkias whom Sedekias king of Juda sent
              to the king of Babylon at Babylon, a letter for the captives ad-
          5 dressed to all the people saying, Thus said the Lord the God of
              Israel to the captivity whom I have exiled from Jerusalem,
              " Build houses and dwell therein and plant orchards and eat the
                                                                      ;
          6 fruits thereof; and take wives and beget sons and daughters;
              take wives also for your sons and give your daughters in mar-
              riage ; and multiply and be not diminished ; and study the peace
              of the country to which I have exiled you; and pray to the
          8 Lord for the people; for in their peace you will have peace.
              For thus said the Lord, Let not the false prophets among
              you deceive you; nor let your diviners deceive you; nor
         Ch. XXIX.                 JEEEMIAS.
         10 hearken to your dreams which you dream.         For they pro-
            phesy falsehood to you in my name, and I have not sent them.
            For thus said the Lord, When seventy years shall be accom-
            plished at Babylon, I will visit you and establish my words for
         11 you by bringing back your people to this place.   When I plan
         12 a purpose of peace and not evils against you, to grant you this,
         13 then pray to me and I will hearken to you : then seek me dili-
         14 gently and you shall find me.  Because you will seek me with
            your whole heart, therefore I will manifest myself to you."
         15    Because you said, The Lord hath raised up prophets for
         21 us in Babylon, thus said the Lord against Achiab and against
            Sedekias, behold I deliver them into the hands of the king of
         22 Babylon and he will smite them before your eyes.   And among
            all the captives of Juda at Babylon ; they shall from them use
            an execration saying, " The Lord deal with thee as he did
            with Sedekias, and as he did with Achiab whom the king of Ba-
         23 bylon roasted with fire," because they have committed iniquity
            in Israel and have committed adultery with the wives of their
            fellow citizens, and have delivered as prophets a word in my
            name, which I did not give them in charge. I myself am witness
         24 saith the Lord.  And to Samaias the Ailamite thou shalt say, I
         25 did not send thee : yet in my name he said to Sophonias son of
         26 Maasias, the priest, "The Lord hath made thee priest in the
            room of Jodae the priest, to be a ruler in the house of the
            Lord, over every man who prophesieth, and over every man
            who divineth, that thou mayst commit him to prison, and
         27 confine him in a dungeon."    Now why have you reviled Je-
         28 remias of Anathoth who prophesied to you ?     Was it not for
            this purpose that information was given that within this month
            he had sent to you to Babylon, saying, Your return is far off;
            build houses and dwell therein ; plant orchards and eat the
         29 fruits thereof.WhenSophonias read this letter in the hearing of
         30 Jeremias, a word of the Lord came to Jeremias saying, Send
         31 to the captives, and say, Thus said the Lord, against Sama-
            ias the Ailamite, Because Samaias hath prophesied to you,
            and I did not send him, and he hath made you trust in false-
            hoods, therefore thus said the Lord, Behold I will punish
             Samaias and his family, and there shall not be a man of them
    Ch. XXL XXXIV.             JEREMIAS.
        among you to see the good things which I will do for you.
        They shall not see them.
    XXI.      XIX. THE word which came from the Lord to Je-
       remias when king Sedekias sent to him Paschor son of Mel-
     2 chias, and Sophonias son of Basaias the priest saying, Inquire
       of the Lord concerning us for the king of Babylon is come
       against us.  Will the Lord do according to all his wonderous
     3 works that he may depart from us.   Thereupon Jeremias said
       to them, Thus shall you say to Sedekias king of Juda, Thus
     4 saith the Lord, Behold I turn back the weapons of war with
       which you fight against the Chaldeans who have besieged you
     5 without the wall.  And I will bring them into this city.  I
       myself indeed will fight against you with an outstretched hand
     6 and a strong arm, with wrath and with great indignation.And
       I will smite all the inhabitants of this city, both men and beasts
     7 with a great pestilence, and they shall die.And after that, saith
       the Lord, I will deliver Sedekias king of Juda and his servants
       and the people left in this city from the pestilence and from the
       famine and from the sword, into the hands of their enemies
       who seek their lives, and they shall smite them with the edge
       of the sword. I will not spare them, nor will I have compas-
     8 sion on them. And to this people thou shalt say, Thus saith the
       Lord, Behold I have set before you the way of life and the way
     9 of death. He who abideth in this city, shall die by the sword
       and famine, but he who goeth out to the Chaldeans who have
       besieged you, he shall live.His life shall be given him for a
    10 spoil and he shall live.For I have set my face against this
       city for evils and not for good.It shall be delivered into the
    11 hands of the king of Babylon and he will burn it with fire.
    12 With respect to the house of the king of Juda, hear a word
       of the Lord,   house of David.  Thus saith the Lord, Admi-
       nisterjudgment in the morning and relieve and deliver the spoil-
       ed out of the hand of him who wrongeth him, that my wrath
       may not be kindled like a fire and blaze so that none can
       quench it.
    XXXIV.      XX.    THE word which came to Jeremias from
       the Lord, when Nabuchodonosar king of Babylon, with all his
          VOL. II.               3 Q
                                                                                                                                             ;
                Cb. XXXIV.                                        JEREMIAS.
                      army and every country under his dominion were warring
                       against Jerusalem, and against all the cities of Juda, saying,
                  2          Thus said the Lord, Go to Sedekias king of Juda and say
                       to him, Thus said the Lord, This city shall assuredly be de-
                       livered into the hands of the king of Babylon ; and he shall
                  3 take it, and burn it with fire.                                And thou shalt not escape out
                       of his hand.               Thou shalt indeed be taken and delivered into
                       his hands ; and thine eyes shall see his eyes ; and to Babylon
                       thou shalt go.
                   4         Nevertheless hear the word of the Lord,                                               Sedekias king
                   5 of Juda, Thus said the Lord, Thou shalt die in peace; and
                       as they bewailed thy fathers who reigned before thee so will
                       they bewail thee with "Alas Lord" and utter a lamentation
                       for thee at thy burial ; for I have spoken the word said the
                       Lord.
                   6          So Jeremias delivered to king Sedekias all these words
                   7 at Jerusalem when the army of the king of Babylon was war-
                       ring against Jerusalem and against the cities of Juda namely
                       against Lachis and against Azeka ; for they were the only
                       fortified cities which were left of the cities of Juda.
                   8          XXI.           The word which came to Jeremiasfrom the Lord.
                              After king Sedekias had made a covenant with the people
                   9 to proclaim a release, that every man should set free his man
                       servant and his maid servant of Hebrew extraction so that no
                 10 person of Juda should continue in slavery ; when all the nobles
                       and all the people who had entered into covenant, to set free
                 11 everv one his man servant, and his maid servant, altered
                 12 their minds and compelled them to become their servants
                 13 thereupon a word of the Lord came to Jeremias saying, Thus
                        said the Lord, I made a covenant with your fathers, at the
                        time I brought them out of the land of Egypt, out of the
                 14 house of bondage, saying, When six years are accomplished
                        thou shalt set at liberty thy brother, a Hebrew, who shall be
                        sold to thee.               When he hath worked for thee six years, thou
                        shalt let him go free.                        But they have not hearkened to me,
                  15 nor inclined their ear.                         And now when they turned to do what
                        is right in my sight, by proclaiming a general release, every
                        one to his neighbour; and had made a covenant in my pre-
          68                                                                                                                                    ;
        Ch. XXXVIr.                                            JEEEMIAS.
        1      sence in the house which is called by my name ; you have
               turned back and profaned my name, by causing every one his
               man servant, and every one his maid servant whom you had
               sent away free at their own disposal, to return and become your
        17 servants: therefore thus said the Lord, You have not hearkened
               to me to proclaim a general release, every one to his neighbour
               behold, I proclaim a dismission of you to the sword, and to pes-
               tilence and to famine ; and I will deliver you up to dispersion in
        1      all the kingdoms of the earth.                                     I will indeed give up the men
               who have transgressed my covenant—them, who have not
               stood to this covenant of mine which they entered into in my
        19 presence—as the labouring bullock which they sacrificed I will
               deliver up the chiefs of Juda and the rulers, and the priests,
        20 and the people themselves to their enemies : and their car-
               casses shall be meat for the birds of the air and the beasts of
        21 the earth : and I will deliver Sedekias king of Judea, and
               their chiefs, into the hands of their enemies.                                                     And as for the
               army of the king of Babylon, even to them who are retreating,
        22 behold I am about to issue orders, saith the Lord, and I will
               cause them to return to this city.                                      And they shall fight against
               it, and take it and burn it with fire.                                       And I will make the cities
               of Juda a desolation, without inhabitants.
         XXXVII. XXII. When Sedekias son of Josias, whom Nabu-
               chodonosar had made king over Juda, reigned in the room of
           2 Joakim, and neither he nor his servants nor the people of the
               land hearkened to the words which the Lord spoke by the mi-
           3 nistry of Jeremias and king Sedekias : sent Joachel son of Sele-
               mias and Sophonias son of Maasias the priest to Jeremias say-
           4 ing, Pray now to the Lord for us.                                          (Now Jeremias went out and
                came in through the midst of the city and they had not com-
                mitted him to prison, and the army of Pharao had come out of
           5 Egypt, and the Chaldeans had heard the news of them when
                they came up against Jerusalem.)                                           Then a word of the Lord
           6 came to Jeremias, saying, Thus said the Lord, Thus shalt
           7 thou say to the king of Juda who hath sent to thee to inquire
                of me, Behold the army of Pharao which is coming to your
                assistance shall turn back to the land of Egypt, and the Chalde-
                                         JEREMIAS.
         Ch. XXXII.
             ans shall return and fight against this city and take it and burn
           9 it with fire.    For thus said the Lord, Flatter not yourselves,
             saying, " The Chaldeans are retreating ; they will depart from
         10 us."    For they shall not depart.      Nay, though you should smite
             all the army of the Chaldeans who are warring against you
             and only some wounded men should be left, every one in his
             place ; these shall rise up and burn this city with fire.
         11      Now when the army of the Chaldeans left Jerusalem, on
         12 account of the army of Pharao, Jeremias was going out of Je-
             rusalem among the people with a design to go to the land of
         13 Benjamin, to make thence some purchase ; but when he was at
             the gate of Benjamin, a man there at whose house he stopped
             namely Sarouia son of Selemias, son of Ananias, took hold of
         14 Jeremias, saying, Thou art fleeing to the Chaldeans.             To which
             he replied, It is false.   I am not fleeing to the Chaldeans.         But
             Sarouia hearkened not to him, but took hold of Jeremias and
         15 brought him to the chiefs.       And the chiefs were enraged at Jere-
             mias and smote him and committed him to the house of Jona-
         16 than the scribe ; for they had made that a prison.             And when
             Jeremias had gone into the lowest apartment, even into the
             Chereth, and had been there many days, Sedekias sent for
         17 him.     And the king asked him privately to tell him whether
             there was a message from the Lord.           And Jeremias said, There
             is.  Thou shalt be delivered into the hands of the king of Ba-
         18 bylon.     Then Jeremias said to the king, Wherein have I offend-
             ed thee and thy servants and this people, that thou hast com-
         19 mitted me to prison?         Where now are your prophets who pro-
             phesied to you saying, " The king of Babylon shall not come
         20 against this land ? "      Now therefore, my Lord the king, let me
             find favour in thy sight.      Why art thou sending me back to the
          21 house of Jonathan the scribe ? Must I not die there ?         Thereupon
              the king gave orders and they committed him to the guard
              house and gave him a loaf of bread a day from the bake house
              until all the bread in the city was spent.       So Jeremias remained
              in the court of the prison.
         XXXII. XXIII. THE word which came from the Lord to Jere-
             mias in the tenth year of king Sedekias ; this was the eighteenth
             year of the reign of Nabuchodonosar king of Babylon.                When
         6                                                                                                                           ;
              XXXII.                                     JEREMIAS.
      Ck.
             the army of the king of Babylon was besieging Jerusalem, and
             Jeremias was confined in the court of the prison which is in
        3 the king's house, to which king Sedekias had confined him,
             saying, "Why dost thou prophesy and say, thus said the
             Lord, Behold I deliver this city into the hands of the king of
        4 Babylon and he shall take it ; and Sedekias shall not escape out
             of the hands of the Chaldeans, for he shall assuredly be deliver-
             ed into the hands of the king of Babylon who shall speak to
             him mouth to mouth and his eyes shall see his eyes : and Sede-
         6 kias shall go to Babylon."                             Now when he was there, the word of
         7 the Lord came to Jeremias, saying, Behold Anameel son of Sa-
             lom thy father's brother is coming to thee and will say, Buy
             thee my field which is at Anathoth, for the right of purchase is
             in thee.
         8          Accordingly Anameel son of Salom my father's brother
             came to me in the court of the prison and said, Buy thee my
             field which is in the land of Benjamin, that at Anathoth, for
             the right of purchase is in thee as thou art the eldest.                                                      Upon
         9 this I knew that it was a word of the Lord, so I bought the
             field of Anameel, my father' s brother's son and paid him se-
       10 venteen shekels of silver.                             And when I had signed the writing
             and sealed it and had it witnessed and had paid the money by
       11 weight, I took the deed of possession which was sealed and
             gave it to Baruch, son of Nerias son of Maasias in the presence
       12 of xlnameel my father's brother's son, and in the presence of
             the byestanders who had signed the deed of purchase, and in
              the presence of the Jews who were in the court of the prison
       13 and in their presence I gave a charge to Baruch, saying, Thus
       14 said the Lord Almighty, Take this deed of possession, even
             this deed which hath been read, and put it in an earthen vessel
       15 that it may remain there many days.                                            For thus said the Lord,
              Fields and houses and vineyards shall again be possessed in
       1      this land.          And after I had given the deed of purchase to Baruch
              son of Nerias, I prayed to the Lord, saying,
       17                 self-existent Lord, Thou hast made the heaven and the
              earth by thy great power and by thy high and exalted arm.
       18 From thee nothing can be hid.                                       Thou shewest mercy to thou-
              sands and retributest the sins of fathers into the bosoms of their
        19 children after them.                         Thou art the God, the Great, the Mighty
            XXXII.                 JEEEMIAS.
        Ch.
           One, the Lord of great counsel, and mighty in works, the
           Mighty Omnipotent God, and the Lord of great renown.     Thine
           eyes are on the ways of the children of men to give to every
        20 one according to his way.    Thou hast done signs and wonders
           in the land of Egypt which continue even to this day; and in
            Israel and among the inhabitants of the earth ; and hast made
        21 thyself a name as at this day. Thou didst bring thy people Is-
           rael out of the land of Egypt with signs and wonders and with
           a strong hand and an outstretched arm and with stupendous
        22 visions, and gavest them this land which with an oath thou
            hadst promised to their fathers, a land flowing with milk and
        23 honey.   But when they entered in and had taken possession
            of it, they hearkened not to thy voice nor walked in thy sta-
            tutes. They did not do all that thou commandedstthem, so they
        24 have brought upon themselves all these evils.    Behold a mul-
            titude is come up against this city to take it; and this city is
            about to be delivered into the hands of the Chaldeans who are
            fighting against it, by reason of the sword and famine.As thou
        25 hast spoken, so it hath come to pass.   Now thou sayest to me,
            Buy thee a field for money. Accordingly I have signed the deed
            of purchase and sealed it and had it witnessed ; though the
            city is about to be delivered into the hands of the Chaldeans.
         26    Then a word of the Lord came to me saying, I the Lord
         27 am the God of all flesh.  From me nothing can be hid.    There-
         28 fore thus said the Lord the God of Israel, This city will assur-
            edly be given up into the hands of the king of Babylon, and
         29 he will take it.  And the Chaldeans who are fighting against
            this city will come and burn this city with fire; and they will
            burn those houses on the tops of which they have offered in-
            cense to Baal and poured out libations to strange gods, to pro-
         30 voke me.   Because the children of Israel and the children of
            Juda have clone nothing but evil before mine eyes from their
         31 youth—because this very city hath been an object of my wrath
             and of my resentment from the day it was built to this day ; let
         32 him remove it from my presence on account of all the iniqui-
             ties of the children of Israel and Juda, which they and their kings
             and their chiefs and their priests and their prophets, the men of
             Juda and the inhabitants of Jerusalem have done to provoke
         33 me.    For they have turned to me their back and not their face.
    (Jh. XXXIII.                JEKEMIAS.
        Though I taught theui betimes, they would uo more receive
    34 instruction, but have set up their abominations in the house
        which is called by my name, and polluted it with their impuri-
    35 ties ; and have built up the altars to Baal which were in the val-
        ley of the son of Ennom to offer up their sons and their daugh-
        ters to king Moloch—a thing which I never commanded them,
        nor did it ever come into my mind that they should commit
        such an abomination to cause Juda to transgress heinously.
    36     Bnt now thus said the Lord the God of Israel respecting
        this city, which as thou sayest shall be delivered into the hands
    37 of the king of Babylon by sword and by famine and by pesti-
        lence ; behold I will gather them from every land through
        which I have in my wrath and in my great indignation dispers-
        ed them : and I will bring them back to this place and cause
    38 them to live securely.    And they shall be my people and I will
    39 be their God.    And I will give them another way and another
        heart that I may be always feared and may be for good to
    40 them and their children after them.     And I will make an ever-
        lasting covenant with them, which I will not turn away from
        them ; and I will put my fear in their heart, that they may not
     41 apostatise from me ; and I will watch over them to do them
        good, and plant them in this land with faithfulness even with
     42 my whole heart and soul.     For thus said the Lord, as I have
        brought upon this people at these great evils, so I will bring
     43 upon them all these good things, which I have spoken concern-
        ing them.    And fields shall again be purchased in this land
        which as thou sayest shall be untrodden by men and beasts
     44 when they are delivered into the hands of the Chaldeans.      And
        they shall purchase fields for money.   And thou shalt subscribe
        deeds and seal them and cause them to be witnessed in the
        land of Benjamin and around Jerusalem and in the cities of
        Juda and in the cities of the mountain and in the cities of Se-
        phela and in the cities of Xageb; for I will bring back their
        captivities.
     XXXIII.       XXIV. AGAIN a word of the Lord came to Je-
         remias a second time while he was still a prisoner in the court
      2 of the prison, saying, Thus saith the Lord, the maker of the
      3 earth, who formed it that he might regulate it.       His name is
                                                                                                                                ;
                       XXXIII.                               JEKEMIAS.
               Ch.
                     the Lord; Cry to me and I will answer thee and shew thee
                 4 great and marvellous things which thou hast not known.                                                  For
                     thus said the Lord concerning the houses of this city; and
                     concerning the houses of the king of Juda which have been
                 5 pulled down to make mounts and ramparts to fight against the
                     Chaldeans and to fill the city with the carcasses of men whom
                     I have slain in mine indignation and in my wrath; and from
                     whom I have turned away my face for all their wicked deeds
                 6 behold I am raising up for it a cure for wounds and a restora-
                     tive, which I will shew them, and I will heal it and give it peace
                 7 and fidelity.             And I will bring back the captivity of Juda and
                     the captivity of Israel ; and I will build them up as in former
                 8 times.         And I will cleanse them from all their iniquities which
                     they have committed against me, and no more remember the
                     sins which they sinned against me, when they apostatised
                 9 from me.             And it shall be for a joy and praise and for a sub-
                    ject of exultation to all the people of the earth who shall hear
                     all the good things which I will do.                              And they will be struck
                     with awe and remorse for all the good and for all the peace
                     which I will procure for them.
               10          Thus said the Lord, In the place which you say is a desert
                     without men and beasts—in the cities of Juda and in the streets
                     of Jerusalem which have been desolate so as to have neither
                     man nor beast, there shall be heard again the sound of joy
                     and the sound of mirth ;                         the voice of bridegroom and the
                     voice      of the bride ;               the voice of people, saying, "Praise
                     the Lord Almighty ; for the Lord is gracious ; for his mercy
               11 endureth forever."                    And they shall bring gifts to the house of
                    the Lord.            For I will bring back all the captivity of this land,
                     as in former times, saith the Lord.
               12          Thus saith the Lord of hosts, There shall be again in this
                     very place which shall be desolate, without man or beast, in
               13 all the cities belonging to it lodging places for shepherds fold-
                     ing flocks.          In the cities of the hilly country and in the cities of
                     Sephela, and in the cities of Nageb and in the land of Benja-
                     min and in those around Jerusalem and in the cities of Juda,
                     flocks shall again pass under the hand of him that counteth
                     them, said the Lord.
        XXXVIII.            JEREMIAS.
    Ch.
    XXXVIII. XXV.        WHEN Saphanias son of Xathan and Go-
       dolias son of Paschor and Joachal son of Seraelias, heard the
       words which Jeremias spoke concerning the people saying,
      2 " Thus said the Lord, He who abideth in this city shall die by
       the sword and the famine ; but he who goeth out to the Chal-
     3 deans shall live. He shall have his life for a spoil. He shall live.
       For thus said the Lord, This city shall certainly be delivered
     4 into the hands of the army of the king of Babylon and he shall
       take it," they said to the king, Let this man, we pray thee, be
        put out of the way ; for he weakeneth the hands of the warriors
       who are left in the city and the hands of all the people by
       making such speeches to them. For this man prophesieth not
      5 peace to the people, but only evils.And the king said, Be-
        hold he is in your hands.For the king could not withstand
      6 them. So they threw him into the dungeon of Melchias the
        king's son which was in the court of the prison.And when
        they had lowered him down into the dungeon, there was
        no water in the dungeon, but there was mire ; and he
      7 was in the mire.   But when Abdemelech, the EthiopiaD,
        who was in the king's family, heard that they had put Jere-
      8 mias in the dungeon, as the king was at the gate of Benja-
      9 min, he went out to him and spoke to the king, and said, Thou
        hast done wrong in ordering this man to be put to death out
     10 of the way of the famine, for there is no bread in the city.
        Thereupon the king gave orders to Abdemelech, saying,
        Take hence with thee thirty men and draw him up out of the
     11 dungeon, that he may not die.So Abdemelech took the men
        and went to the king's house, into the cellar, and took thence
        old rags and old ropes and threw them down to Jeremias into
     12 the dungeon, and said, Put those under the ropes.And when
        Jeremias had done so, they drew him up with the ropes out of
     13 the dungeon. And Jeremias abode in the court of the prison.
     14 And the king sent and ordered him to come to him to the house
        Aseleisel which is in the house of the Lord.And the king said
        to him, I will ask thee a word and thou must not conceal any thing
     15 from me. And Jeremias said to the king, If I tell thee, wilt thou
        not put me to death ? And if I give thee counsel, perhaps thou wilt
     16 not hearken to me. Then the king swore to him, saying, As
        the Lord liveth who made us this soul, I will not put thee to
           VOL. II.             3 R
                                                                                                                        ;
                    XXXIX.                              JEREMIAS.
             Ch.
             17 death, nor will I deliver thee into the hands of those men.                                       x\.nd
                  Jeremias said, Thus said the Lord, [f thou wilt go out to the
                  generals of the king of Babylou, thy soul shall live and this
                  city will not be burned with fire.                         Both thou and thy family
             18 shall live.          But if thou wilt not go out, this city will be deliver-
                  ed into the hands of the Chaldeans and they will burn it with
             19 fire ; and thou shalt not escape.                       And the king said to Jeremias,
                  I am afraid of the Jews who have fled to the Chaldeans, lest
                  upon being delivered into their hand they make me a mock-
             20 ing stock.            And Jeremias replied, Thou wilt not be delivered
                  up to them, Hear the word of the Lord which I speak to thee
             21 and it will be better for thee and thy soul shall live.                                But if thou
                  wilt not go out, this is the word which the Lord hath revealed
                  to me,
            22          "And behold all the women who were left in the house of
                  the king of Juda were brought out to the chiefs of the king of
                  Babylon.           And they said, Thy men of peace deceived thee,
                  and will prevail over thee.                      And with a fall they will weaken
            23 thy foot.           They are gone from thee.                       And thy wives and thy
                  children shall be brought out to the Chaldeans.                                And thou shalt
                  not escape.          For by the hand of the king of Babylon thou shalt
                  be taken and this city shall be burned."
            24          Then the king said to him, Let no man know any of these
            25 words, and thou shalt not be put to death.                                    And if the chiefs
                  hear that I have spoken to thee and come to thee and say, Tell
            20 us, What did the king say to thee ?                               Hide it not from us and
                  we will not put thee to death.                     What did the king say to thee ?
                  Then thou shalt say to them, I presented my supplication be-
                  fore the king that he would not send me back to the house
            27 of Jonathan to die there.                          So when all the chiefs came to
                  Jeremias and questioned him, he answered them according
                  to all the words which the king commanded and they were si-
            29 lent ; for the word of the Lord was not heard.                                   So Jeremias re-
                  mained in the court of the prison until Jerusalem was taken.
            XXXIX.                 Now it came to pass that in the ninth year and ninth
                  month of Sedekias king of Juda, Nabuchodonosar king of Ba-
              2 bylon with all his army came against Jerusalem and besieged
                  it.    And in the eleventh year of Sedekias in the fourth month on
              3 the ninth day of the month, a breach was made into the city
        7
       Ch. XT.                            JEEEMIAS.
           and all the generals of the king of Babylon entered and sat in
           the middle gate, namely, Marganasar, and Samagoth and Na-
           bnsachar and Xabusaris, Xagargas, Xaserrabamath, and the
       1 i rest of the generals of the king of Babylon ; and they sent and
           took Jeremias ont of the court of the prison and committed
           him to Godolias son of Achikam son of Saphan.                        And when
           they brought him out he sat down among the people.
       15       Xow there had come to Jeremias in the court of the prison
       16 a word of the Lord, saying, Go and say to Abdemelech the
           Ethiopian, Thus said the Lord the God of Israel, Behold I
       1   will bring my words on this city for evils and not for good.                  But
           I will save thee on that day and not deliver thee into the hands
       18 of those men of whom thou art afraid.               For I will save thee and
           thou shalt not fall by the sword.            And thou shalt have thy life
           for a spoil, because thou hast trusted in me, said the Lord.
       XL. XXYI.             The word which came from the Lord to Jeremias
                after Nabusardan the chief cook, he who was of Rama, had
                dismissed him.
                   WHENthe chief cook found him in chains in the midst
        2 of the captives of Juda who were to be carried to Babylon, he
        o took him and said to him, The Lord thy God hath denounced
           all these evils against this place, and the Lord hath done them,
        4 because you sinned against him and did not hearken to his
           voice.    Behold I have loosed thee from the chains which were
           on thy hands.       If it seemeth good to thee to go with me to Ba-
        5 bylon, I will have an eye over thee.                But if not, Go thy way.
           Keturn to Godolias son of Achikam son of Saphan whom the
           king of Babylon hath set over the land of Juda and dwell with
        6* him among the people in the land of Juda.                 Go whithersoever it
           seemeth best in thine eyes to go.             So the chief cook gave him
           gifts and dismissed him ; and he went to Godolias to Massepha
        7 and dwelt among his people who were left in the land.                         Now
           when all the generals of the army in the country, both they and
           their men heard that the king of Babylon had set Godolias over
           the land, and had committed to him the men and their wives
        8 whom he had not removed to Babylon, there came to Godolias,
           at Massepha, Ismael son of Xathanias and Joanan son of Karae
           and Saraias son of Thanaemeth and the sons of Jophe the Ne-
                                                                                                                    ;
            Oh. XLI.                                  JEREMIAS.
             9 tophathite and Ezonias son of Mochathi, they and their men
                 and Godolias swore to them and their men, saying, Be not
                 afraid of the Chaldeans : dwell in the land and serve the king
            10 of Babylon, and it will be better for you.                              As for me, behold
                 I reside before you, at Massepha to meet the Chaldeans who
                 may come against you.                  But as for you, collect wine and sum-
                 mer fruits and oil and lay them up in your vessels and dwell in
            11 the cities which you have taken possession of.                                   All the Jews
                 also who were in Moab and among the Ammonites and those
                 in Idumea and in all that country, when they heard that the
                 king of Babylon had left a remnant for Juda and had set Go-
            12 dolias son of Achikam over them, came to Godolias into the
                 land of Juda to Massepha, and collected wine and summer
            13 fruits in great abundance, and oil.                          And Joanan son of Karae
                 and all the generals of the army who were in the country came
            11 to Godolias to Massepha and said to him, Dost thou know that
                 Beleissa king of the Ammonites hath sent Ismael to thee, to
            15 take thy life.            But Godolias did not believe them.                          And when
                 Joanan said privately to Godolias at Massepha, "Let me, I
                 pray thee, go and smite Ismael and let none know it ; lest he
                 kill thee ; and all Juda who are gathered to thee, be dispersed
            16 and the remnant of Juda perish."                              Godolias said to Joanan,
                 Thou must not do this : for what thou sayest of Ismael is
                 false.
            XLI. Now it cameto pass that in the seventh month Ismael son of
                 Nathanias son of Eleasa ofthe royal family and ten chief men with
                 him came to Godolias at Massepha and they there ate bread toge-
              2 ther.       And Ismael arose and the ten chiefs who were with him,
              3 and smote Godolias whom the king of Babylon had set over
                 the land, and all the Jews who were with him at Massepha
              4 and all the Chaldeans who were found there.                                And it happened
                 that on the second day after he had slain Godolias and it was
              5 not generally known, there came eighty men from Sychem
                 and from Salem and from Samaria, with their beards shaven
                 and their clothes rent and in deep mourning, with manna and
                 frankincense in their hands, to make an offering for the house
              6 of the Lord.            And Ismael went out to meet them as they were
                  proceeding on in their journey weeping, and said to them, Come
              7 to Godolias.           And when they were come into the midst of the
          XLIL                   JEREMIAS.
     Ch.
      8 city he slew them at the pit.     But there were ten men among
         them who said to Ismael, Do not kill us ; for we have treasures
         in a field, wheat and barley, honey and oil.   So he forbore and
      9 did not kill them among their brethren.         Now the pit, into
         which Ismael threw all that he had slain, was that great pit
     10 which king Asa had made for fear of Baasa king of Israel.      This
         Ismael filled with the slain.  And Ismael carried away all the
         people who were left at Massepha and the king's daughters
         whom the chief cook had committed to the care of Godolias
         son of Achikam ; and fled towards the borders of the Anmion-
     11 ites.  But when Joanan son of Karae and all the generals of
         the army who were with him heard all the evils which Ismael
     12 had done, they drew out their whole army and marched with
         speed to fight him and came up with him at the great waters
         at Gabaon.    And when all the people who were with Ismael
     13 saw Joanan and the generals of the army who were with him,
     15 they turned back to Joanan; but Ismael escaped with eight
     16 men and fled to the children of Ammon.       Then Joanan and all
         the generals of the army who were with him took all the rern-
     17 nant of the people whom they had rescued from Ismael—the
         men fit for war and the women and children and the eunuchs
         whom they brought back from Gabaon and marching with
         speed they encamped at Gaberochama which is near Bethle-
         hem with an intent to go to Egypt for fear of the Chaldeans.
     18 For they were afraid of them because Ismael had slain Godo-
     XLTI.    lias whom the king of Babylon had set over the land.     And
         all the generals of the army with Joanan and Azarias son of
         Maasias and all the people small and great came to Jeremias
       2 the prophet and said to him, Have compassion on us, we be-
         seech thee and pray to the Lord thy God for this remnant,
      3 for we are left only few of many as thine eyes see.        Now let
         the Lord thy God point out to us the way which we should
      4 go and what we are to do.     Whereupon Jeremias said to them,
         I have heard.   Behold, I will pray for you to the Lord our God
         according to your words and whatever answer the Lord our
         God shall give that I will declare to you.    I will not hide any
       5 thing from you.     And they said to Jeremias, The Lord be a
         true and faithful witness between us, that we will act conform-
         ably to the word, whatever it be, which the Lord shall send
                  —                                                          ——
         Cli. XLII.                  JEREffiAS.
          6 to us.  Whether it be agreeable or disagreeable we will hearken
            to the voice of the Lord our God in respect to that for which
            we send thee to him, that it may be the better for us.      We will
            obey the voice of the Lord our Grod.
          7    So after ten days a word of the Lord came to Jeremias, where-
          8 upon he sent for Joanan and the generals of the army, and all
          9 the people small and great, and said to them, Thus said the
            Lord, " If you will abide in this land I will build you up, and
        10 not pull you down ; and I will plant you, and not root you up ;
        11 for I am appeased by the evils which I have done to you.          Be
            not afraid of the king of Babylon of whom you are in dread.
            Be not afraid of him, saith the Lord, for I am with you to de-
        12 liver you, and to save you out of his hands.        And I will shew
            you mercy, and have compassion on you, and bring you back
        13 to your own land.      But if in direct disobedience to the voice
        14 of the Lord you say, " We will not abide in this land ; for we
            will go to the land of Egypt, that we may not see war nor
            hear the trumpet's sound, nor pine for want of bread; and we
        15 will dwell there."    Then hear the word of the Lord, Thus said
            the Lord, If you set your face for Egypt, and go there to make
        10 your abode; the sword of which you are afraid shall find you
            in the land of Egypt ; and the famine which you wish to avoid
            shall follow and overtake you in Egypt, and there you shall
        17 die.   For all the men even all the strangers who have set their
            faces towards the land of Egypt to dwell there, shall perish
            by the sword and by famine, and not one of them shall escape
        18 from those evils which I bring upon them.         For thus said the
            Lord, As my wrath was poured out on the inhabitants of Je-
            rusalem, so shall my wrath be poured out upon you, if you go
            to Egypt ; and you shall be wasted and made slaves, and be
            for an execration and reproach ; and shall never see this land
            again.
        19      These are the things which the Lord hath spoken respecting
            you, the remnant of Juda ; that you may not go to Egypt.
        20 For now you must be sensible that you did evil in your hearts
            when you sent me saying, Pray for us to the Lord, and we
            will act conformably to all that the Lord shall say to thee.
        21 For you have not hearkened to the voice of the Lord, which
        22 he hath sent by me to you.         Now therefore you shall perish
      Ob. XLTII.                     JEKEMIAS.
          by the sword and by famine, in that place to which yon are
          determined to go there to make your abode.
      XLIII.       And when Jeremias^ had made an end of speaking all
          these words of the Lord to the people, even all the words
       2 which the Lord had sent him to speak to them, Azarias son
          of Maasias and Joanan son of Karae, and all the men who had
         spoken to Jeremias, said in reply, It is false.          The Lord hath
         not sent thee to us, saying, You shall not go to Egypt to dwell
       3 there.    But Baruch son of Nerias setteth thee on against us,
         that thou mayst deliver us into the hands of the Chaldeans to
       4 be put to death, or banished to Babylon.          So Joanan and all the
         generals of the army and all the people hearkened not to the
       5 voice of the Lord to dwell in the land of Juda.              And Joanan
         and all the generals of the army took all the remnant of Juda,
       6 who had returned to dwell in the land, the men fit for war,
         and the women and the children which were left and the king's
         daughters, even all the souls which Nabusardan had left with
         Godolias son of Achikam, including Jeremias the prophet, and
       7 Baruch son of Nerias, and went to Egypt.            Because they heark-
       8 ened not to the voice of the Lord, therefore when they came to
         Taphnas, a word of the Lord came to Jeremias at Taphnas,
       9 saying, Take thee large stones and bury them at the entrance
         of the gate of Pharao's house at Taphnas, in the presence of
     10 the men of Juda and thou shalt say, Thus said the Lord, Be-
         hold I send and I will bring JSTabuchodonosar king of Baby-
         lon and he shall place his throne over these stones, which thou
     11 hast hidden, and pile his arms over them.               And when he is
         come he will smite the land of Egypt, sentencing to death
         them who are for death ; and to banishment such as are for
     12 banishment ; and to the sword such as are for the sword.               And
         he will kindle a fire in the houses of their gods, and burn the
         houses and carry away the god's captives : and he will search
         the land of Egypt, as a shepherd doth his garment, and shall
     l.°>go thence in peace.        And he will break in pieces the pillars
         of Heliopolis, even those of On, and burn their houses with
         fire.—
                                                                       —
            XLIV.                 JEEEMTAS.
        Ch.
        XLIV.      XXVII. The word which came to Jeremias for all
                            dwelt in the land            for them settled
              the Jeivs who                    of Egypt—
              at Magdolus, and at Taphnas, and in the land of Pathoura,
              saying.
         2     THUS said the Lord the God of Israel, You have seen all
           the evils which I brought upon Jerusalem, and upon the cities
         3 of Juda ;  and behold they are desolate, without inhabitants
           because of their wickedness which they committed to provoke
           me, by going to burn incense to strange gods, which you
         4 knew not.    Though I sent to you my servants the prophets,
           rising early and sending them, saying, Do not commit this
         5 abominable thing which I hate ; yet they hearkened not to
           me, nor inclined their ear to turn from their wickedness so as
         6 not to burn incense to strange gods.      Therefore my wrath
           and mine indignation was poured out and kindled to a flame
            in the cities of Juda, and in the streets of Jerusalem, and they
         7 became a desolation and a waste, as at this day.    Now then,
            thus said the Lord Almighty, Why do ye commit great evils
            against your souls, to cut off every man and woman of you,
            with the infant and suckling out of Juda, so that none of you
         8 may be left—to provoke me with the works of your hands
            by burning incense to strange gods in the land of Egypt,
            where you are come to dwell—that you may be cut off and
            become an execration and a reproach, among all the nations
         9 of the earth ?  Have you forgotten the evils of your fathers,
            and the evils of the kings of Juda, and the evils of your chiefs,
            and the evils of your wives, which they committed in the
        10 land of Juda, and in the streets of Jerusalem ? They have not
            indeed even to this day desisted, nor have they adhered to the
        11 ordinances which I set before their fathers; therefore thus
         12 said the Lord, Behold I am setting my face to destroy all
            the remnant in Egypt; and they shall fall by the sword and
            by famine and die, both small and great : and they shall be
         13 for reproach and for destruction and for a curse.   For I will
            visit those settled in Egypt as I visited Jerusalem with sword
         14 and with famine, so that none of this remnant of Juda who
            dwell in Egypt, shall be saved to return to the land of Juda,
            to which they earnestly hope to return, save those only who
            have made their escape thither.
                                       ;                                                                      —
        Ch. XLIV.                                   JEREMIAS.
        15         Then all the men who knew that their wives burned in-
              cense, and all the women, a great congregation, and all the peo-
              ple who were settled in the land of Egypt at Pathoura answered
        16 Jeremias, saying, In regard to this word which thou hast
        17 spoken to us in the name of the Lord, we will not hearken to
              thee ; for we will continue to perform every word which shall
              proceed from our mouth to burn incense to the queen of heaven
              and pour out libations to her; as we and our fathers and our
              kings and our chiefs did in the cities of Juda and in the streets
              of Jerusalem ; for we had then plenty of bread and were in hap-
              py circumstances and saw no evils : but soon as we left off
        18 burning incense to the queen of heaven, we all became fewer
        19 in number, and were wasted by sword and famine.                                        Now grant
              that we have burned incense to the queen of heaven, and pour-
              ed out libations to her, have we without our husbands, made
              cakes for her or poured out to her libations ?
        20         In reply to this Jeremias said to all the people, to the men
              in authority, and to the women and all the people who made
              him this answer
        21         This incense which you offered in the cities of Juda and
              in the streets of Jerusalem, you and your fathers, and your
              kings and your chiefs, and the people of the land, did not the
        22 Lord remember?                   Did it not come into his mind so that the
              Lord could no longer forbear on the account of your evil
              doings and on the account of your abominations which you
              committed?
                   So your land was made a desolation and a waste, and for
        23 a curse as at this day because of the incense, which you of-
              fered, and the sins which you committed against the Lord.
              As you hearkened not to the voice of the Lord, nor walked
              in his statutes and in his law and in his testimonies; there-
             fore these evils have come upon you.
        24         Then Jeremias said to the people, particularly to the wo-
        25 men, Hear a word of the Lord ; Thus saith the Lord the God
              of Israel, Ye women have spoken with your mouths and with
              your hands confirmed it, saying, We will continue to perform
              the vows which we made to burn incense to the queen of hea-
              ven, and pour out libations to her.                         You have obstinately ad-
              hered to your vows, and have actually performed them.
                   vol. ii.                                   3 s
             XLV. XLVI.              JEREMIAS.
        Oh.
        26 Therefore hear a word of the Lord, all ye of Juda, who are
            settled in the land of Egypt ; behold by my great name I have
            sworn said the Lord, my name shall no more be mentioned
            by the mouth of any Jew in all the land of Egypt, saying, As
        27 the Lord liveth.    Because I have watched over them, to afflict
            them, and not to do them good, therefore all the Jews who
            are dwelling in the land of Egypt, shall perish by sword and
        28 by famine, until there be an end of them.         They indeed who
            have escaped from the sword being few in number, shall re-
            turn to the land of Juda ; but the remnant of Juda, who have
            staid in the land of Egypt to settle there, shall know whose
        29 word shall stand.     Now this shall be a sign to you, that I will
        30 visit you for evil : thus said the Lord, Behold I deliver up
            Onaphre king of Egypt, into the hands of his enemy, and into
            the hands of him who seeketh his life, as I delivered Sedekias
            king of Juda into the hands of Nabuchodonosar king of Ba-
            bylon, his enemy, and who sought his life.
        XLV.       XXVIII. The word which Jeremias the prophet spoke
              to Baruch son of Nerias, when he loas writing the tvords in
               the book, from the mouth of Jeremias, in the fourth year of
              Joakim son of Josias king of Juda.
          2     THUS said the Lord concerning thee Baruch, because
          3 thou saidst, " Ah woe is me ! for the Lord hath added grief to
            my sorrow : I laid me down with sighing ; no rest did I find."
          4 Say to him, Thus said the Lord, Behold ! them whom I built
            up, I am pulling down ; them whom I planted, I am rooting
          5 up ; and wilt thou seek great things for thyself?        Seek them
            not.   For behold I am about to bring evils on all flesh, saith
            the Lord ; but I will give thee thy life, for a spoil in every place
             whither thou shalt go.
         XLVI.       XXIX.      TO EGYPT, respecting the army of Pharao
               Nechao,   king of Egypt, who was by the river Euphrates,
               at  Charmis, whom Nabuchodonosar king of Babylon defeated,
               in the fourth year of Joakim king of Juda.
          3     ARM with buckler and shields, and advance to battle.
          4 Harness the horses.     Horsemen mount ! and stand firm in your
             helmets.   Having put on your breast plates, charge with your
     Ch. XLVI.                    JEREMIAS.
      5 lances.   Why are they daunted, and falling back ?          Because
        their «niighty men will be cut down, they fled amain ; they
      6 rallied not, being hemmed in on all sides, saith the Lord.       Let
        not the swift flee, nor the mighty escape to the north.          The
      7 forces at the river Euphrates are weak and have fallen.        Who
        is this that will rush forth like the river, and whose stream
      8 will billow like a flood ?    The waters of Egypt will rush forth
         like a river : for he said, " I will issue forth and overwhelm
      9 the earth, and destroy the inhabitants thereof.         Mount your
         horses, prepare your chariots : march forth ye warriors of Ethi-
         opia ! and ye Libyans well clad in armour ! go up also ye
         Lydians who bend the bow."
     10     (p)   This is indeed a day for the Lord our God : a day
         of vengeance, to execute vengeance on his enemies.         And the
         sword of the Lord shall devour and be filled ; it shall indeed
         be glutted with their blood ; for there is a sacrifice for the Lord
     11 in the land of the north at the river Euphrates.         Go up, Ga-
         laacl, and take balm for the virgin daughter of Egypt.      In vain
         hast thou multiplied thy medicines ; there is no cure for thee.
     12 The nations heard thy voice and with thy screams the land
         was filled : because warrior added to warrior were weak, they
         both fell together.
     13     XXX. The words ivhich the Lord spoke by the ministry of
          Jeremias, that the Icing of Babylon would come and smite the
          land of Egypt.
     14      DESPATCH messengers to Magdolus ; send also to Mem-
         phis.  Say, to arms ! and be ready ! for a sword hath laid waste
     15 thy grove.    WhydidApisflee from thee ? Thy chosen bull, why
         did he not stand ? because the Lord made him weak and thy
     16 multitude was weak and fell.       Therefore every one said to his
         fellow, Let us arise and return to our people, to our native land,
     IT from the face of the Grecian sword.        Call the name of Pharao
         Nechao king of Egypt, " Saon-LJsbie-Moed."
      18     As I live, saith the Lord God, like Itaburion among the
         mountains, and like Channel which is by the sea he shall come.
      19 Get ready utensils for thy removal,          well housed daughter
         of Egypt! for Memphis shall be a waste and shall be called,
      20 " Alas" because in it there are no inhabitants.       Egypt was a
                                                                                                                     ;
             Cb. XLVIT. XXI.                           JEKEMIAS.
                  beautiful heifer; a detachment from the north came against
             21 her.       And the mercenaries, which she had with her, were like
                  fatted bulls which she had fed.                    For they turned and fled with
                  one consent : they made no stand, because the day of destruc-
                  tion came upon them and the time of their visitation.                                      Their
             22 sound is that of a hissing serpent ; for they march in dust.                                 With
            23 axes they will come against her ; like fellers of timber they will
                  cut down her groves, saith the Lord.                           Because she would not
             24 be assimilated.—Because she increaseth more than locusts
                  which are innumerable ; the daughter of Egypt is put to
                  shame : she is delivered into the hands of a people from the
             25 north.         Behold I will punish her son Ammon in the per-
                  son of Pharao, and in the persons of them who trusted in him.
             27 But thou Jacob my servant be not afraid ; and thou Israel
                  be not dismayed.               For behold I will save thee from afar and
                  thy seed from their captivity.                    And Jacob shall return and en-
                  joy rest and sleep ; and there shall be none to discompose him.
             28 Fear not, my servant Jacob, saith the Lord, since I am with
                  thee.      This fearless and luxurious one is delivered up, for I
                  will make an end of every nation to which I have driven thee
                  But of thee I will not make an entire end.                              But I will correct
                  thee for judgment and not suffer thee to go unpunished.
            XLVII.              XXXI. Concerning the Philistines,
              2        THUS saith the Lord, Behold waters are coming from the
                  north, and they shall become an overwhelming flood, and shall
                  overwhelm the land and the fulness thereof—the cities and them
                  who dwell therein : and the men shall utter the scream of distress,
              3 and all the inhabitants of the land, a doleful cry.                              At the sound
                  of his impetuous onset ; at the armour of his infantry ; at the
                  rushing of his chariots ; the rumbling of his wheels ; fathers
                  looked not back on their children, by reason of the feeble-
                  ness of their hands.
              4        In the day which is coming to destroy all the Philistines I
                  will destroy also Tyre and Sidon and all the residue of their help.
             XXL             13 Behold I am against thee who inhabitest the vale of
                  Sor—that plain—them who say, who can terrify us ? or who
             14 can come into our habitation ?                      And I will kindle a fire in its
                  forests and it shall devour all things around it.
    Ch. XLVII1.                  JEREMIAS.
    XLVII.       4    (p)  Because the Lord will utterly destroy the
     5 remnants in the isles, baldness is come upon Gaza : Ascalon
       is overthrown and the remnant of Enakim.
     6     (c)   How long wilt thou hew down,          sword of the Lord ?
       How long will it be ere thou wilt rest ?      Eeturn into thy scab-
        bard, rest and be removed.
     7     (p)   How can it rest when the Lord hath given it a charge
        against Ascalon and the cities on the sea coast and to be lifted
       up against them whom remain ?
    XLVIII.       XXXII.         Respecting Moab,
           THUS said the Lord, Alas ! for Nabo ; for it is destroyed.
     2 Kariathaimis taken. Amath and Agath are put to shame. There
       is no more a cure for Moab ; a boasting in Esebon.       He hath de-
        vised evils against her.  We havecut heroff from being a nation
       and she shall go to rest.    Behind thee the sword shall stalk on.
     3 Because there is a sound of screaming from Oronaim—destruc-
     4 tion and great tribulation, Moab is trodden down.           Despatch
       news to Zogora that Aloth is filled with lamentation ; she will go
     5 up weeping by the way of Oronaim.        You have heard the scream
     6 of distress ; flee and save your lives ; and you shall be like a wild
     7 ass in the desert.   Seeing thou hast trusted in thy fortifications ;
       therefore thou shalt be taken ; and Chamos shall go into banish-
     8 ment, and his priests and his chiefs with him ; and destruction
       shall come on every city, none shall escape.      The vale also shall
     9 be destroyed and the plain wasted as the Lord hath said.       Set up
       marks for Moab; for with destruction she shall be destroyed;
    10 and all her cities shall be for desolation.   Whence can she have
       an inhabitant?     He is cursed who doth the work of the Lord
       negligently, withholding his sword from blood.
    11     Moab enjoyed rest from his youth and trusted in his glory;
       he hath not been decanted from vessel to vessel; and into ba-
       nishment he hath never gone.       Therefore his taste remaineth in
    12 him and his flavour is not lost : Therefore behold the days are
       coming saith the Lord, when I will send decanters and they
        shall decant him ; and they shall break his vessels and cut to
    13 pieces his drinking horns ; and Moab shall be put to shame for
        Chamos, as the house of Israel were for Baithel their confi-
    14 dence.   How can ye who have put confidence in them, say,
           Ch. XLVIII.                            JEEEMIAS.
            15 " We are strong, and a man mighty for feats of war."                                 Moab
                is destroyed with his cities ; and his chosen men are gone down
            16 to slaughter.          The day of Moab is near at hand, and with speed
            17 his calamity is approaching.                 Shake your heads for him, all ye
                 around him          pronounce his name, all of you, say, How the
                                  ;
            18 beautiful sceptre           is   broken !      the   sceptre    of majestyI           Come
                 down from glory and sit low in mire.                    Diabon shall be trampled
                 down because Moab is destroyed.                         The demolisher of thy
            19 strong hold is come up against thee.                         Stand by the way side
                 and take a view,           inhabitant of Aroer ! ask him who is fleeing
            20 and making escape, and say, What is the news ?                              Moab is put
                 to shame ; for he is utterly discomfited.                      Eaise the mournful
                 cry and scream; proclaim in Arnon, that Moab is destroyed.
            21 Judgment is indeed coming on the land of Misor, upon Cha-
                 lon, and Kephas, and Mophas, and on Daibon, and on Nabo,
            22 and on the house of Daithlathaim, and on Kariathaim, and on
            23 the house of Gaimol, and on the house of Maon, and on Kari-
            24 oth, and on Bosor, and on all the cities of Moab far and near.
            25 The horn of Moab is hacked to pieces, and his prowess is
            26 broken. Make him drunk. Because he magnified himself against
                 the Lord, he will therefore clap with his hand at Moab that
            27 he may be an object of derision ; for was not Israel an object of
                 mirth to thee and found among thy stolen goods, because thou
            28 didst fight against him?                  The inhabitants of Moab have left
                 their cities and made their abode among rocks.                               They were
                 like pigeons nestling in rocks at the mouth of a cave.
             29        (p)    I have heard indeed of the pride of Moab: he was
                  very proud—and of his haughtiness ; his heart was elated.
             30        (J)    But as for me I know his works : is not this his de-
             31 sert ?      Hath he not acted thus ?              Therefore raise on all sides the
                  mournful cry for Moab ; scream for the men of Keiradas-auch-
                  mou.
             32        (p)    With the wailing of Jazer I will wail for thee,                          vine
                  of Aserema.         Thy branches extended to the sea ; they reached
                  to the cities of Jazer.             When thy fruit was ripe ; destruction
             33 came upon thy grape gatherers.                    Joy and gladness were snatch-
                  ed from Moab, when the vine was in thy lakes.                           In the morn-
                  ing there was no treading, and in the evening no shouts of
             34 joy.       At the scream of Esebon which reached to Aitam, their
                                                                                                                       ;;!
     Oh. XLIX.                                     JEKEMIAS.
           cities from Zogar to Orouaini uttered their voice, and spread
           the news with an alarm.
                 (J)      Because the water of Nebrin also shall be dried up
     35 therefore I will destroy Moab, saith the Lord, when he is go-
           ing up to the altar and burning incense to his gods.
     36          (p)     For this let the heart of Moab groan like drone
           pipes.       Let my heart sound like a drone for the men of Kei-
          radas.
                (J)      Because all that every man had procured is utterly
     37 destroyed ; let them every where shave the whole head ; and
           let the whole beard be shaven and all hands gashed ; and let
     38 there be sackcloth on every loin, and on all the house tops of
           Moab and in every street : for I have broken him, saith the
     39 Lord, like a vessel that is useless.                                   How did he deprecate
           How did Moab turn his back !                                Moab was ashamed and be-
     40 came a subject of laughter and derision to all around.                                                    For
           thus said the Lord, Karioth is taken and the strong holds are
     41 surprised ; and Moab shall be destroyed from being a niulti-
     42 tude.          Because he magnified himself against the Lord, a trap,
     43 a scare-net and a pit are prepared for thee,                                             inhabitant of
     44 Moab !            He who fleeth from the scare-net shall fall into the pit
           and he who getteth up out of the pit shall be caught in the
           trap.      For I will bring these things on Moab in the year of their
           visitation.
     XLIX.               XXXIII. Respecting the children of Amnion.
                 THUS said the Lord, Hath Israel no sons? or have they
           no heir ?         Why then hath Melchol taken possession of Galaad ?
           Shall his people dwell in their cities ?                           For this cause behold the
       2 days are coming, saith the Lord, when I will cause the tumult
           of battles against Kabbath to be heard ; and they shall be for
           desolation and destruction; and her altars shall be consumed
           with fire ; and Israel shall assume his government.
       3         Kaise the mournful cry,                           Esebon, for Gai is destroyed.
           Scream, ye daughters of Kabbath; gird on sackcloth and
           mourn; for Melchol shall go into banishment and his priests
       4 and his chiefs with him.                        What! are you exulting with joy in
           the vales of Enakim ?                       !  daughter of wantonness who trustest
           in thy treasures—who sayest, Who shall come against me ?
                                                                                                                        ;;
                      XLIX.                               JEREMIAS.
               Ch.
                 5 Behold I am bringing terror against thee, said the Lord, from
                     every neighbour around thee : and you shall be scattered every
                     one before it ; and there shall be none to collect you.
                      XXXIV.                           Respecting Idumea.
                 7        THUS said the Lord, There is no more any wisdom in
                     Thaiman.          Counsel is perished from the prudent.                            Wisdom is
                     fled from them.            Their place hath been led into error.
                          (p) O inhabitants of Daidan ! retire to a deep settlement
                     for he hath brought on calamities.
                          (J) I brought them on him at the time when I visited him.
                 9 Because grape gatherers are come, who will not leave thee a
               10 gleaning.           Like thieves by night they will lay to their hands. Be-
                     cause I plundered Esau and discovered their hidden stores
                     They could not be concealed, they were destroyed.
                11        (p) By means of the hand of his brother my neighbour,
                     there is indeed no place for thine orphan to be left that it may
                     live.
                          (J) But I will cause it to live.                        In me the widows have
               12 trusted.          Because they (said the Lord) who had a law not to
                     drink the cup, drank it; thou therefore shalt not escape un-
               13 punished.            For by myself I have sworn saith the Lord, thou
                     shalt be a desolation and a reproach and a curse in this coun-
                     try and all its cities shall be perpetual wastes.
               14         (p) I have heard a report from the Lord.                                 He hath sent
                     messengers to the nations, [saying] assemble and come against
                     her ; arise for battle.
               15         (J) I have made thee little among the nations, very con-
               16 temptible among men.                       Thine insolency hath entrapped thee
                     the wantonness of thy heart destroyed the holes of rocks.                                       It
                     took possession of a strong, lofty mountain.                              Because like an
                     eagle thou hast built thy nest high ; thence I will pull thee
               17 down : and Idumea shall be a desolation.                                    Every passenger
               18 shall express for it the sound of pity.                           As in the overthrow of
                     Sodom and Gomorra and the neighbouring cities, said the
                     Lord Almighty, no man shall abide there, nor shall a son of
               19 man dwell there.                  Behold they shall be like the lion which
                     must go up from the swelling of Jordan to Aitham.                                  For I will
       Ch. XLIX.                                       JEKEMIAS.
             speedily drive them from that place.                                 Therefore set ye chosen
             warriors against it.
       20          Because who is like me ?                       Or who can withstand me ?                        And
             who is the shepherd who can stand before me ?                                        Therefore hear
             the counsel of the Lord which he hath taken against Idumea,
            and the determination he hath come to against the inhabitants
             of Thaiman : Let all but the tenderest of the flock be destroyed
                                                                                                                         ;
             let all but a resting place for them be made a desolation.
       21          (p) At the sound of their fall the earth trembled, so that
      22 the roaring of the sea was not heard.                                      Behold he will take a
             view like an eagle, and expand his wings against her fortifica-
            tions ; and the heart of the valiant men of Idumea shall be ou
            that day like the heart of a woman in travail.
                      XXXV.                             Respecting Damascus.
                  E3IATH and Arphath are overwhelmed in shame. Be-
            cause they heard bad news they were confounded ; they boiled
      24 with rage ; they cannot take rest.                              Damascus is enervated.                     She
      25 turned to flee : terror seized her.                               How can it be otherwise ?
      26 She forsook my city.                     Did they regard a single village ?                           There-
            fore thy young men shall fall in thy streets ; and all thy valiant
      27 warriors shall fall, saith the Lord.                              And I will kindle a fire in
            the wall of Damascus and it shall consume the palaces of Son
            of Ader.
          XXXVI. Respecting Keclar the queen                                        of      the     court,       which
                                  Nabuchoclonosar king of Babyhib smote.
                  THUS said the Lord ; arise and go up against Kedar ; and
      29 glut the sons of Kedem.                           Let them seize their tents and their
            flocks : let them take for themselves their clothing, all their
            utensils and their camels : and call ye for destruction against
      30 all them around.                    Flee, retire very deep to a settlement,                                in-
           habitants at the court.                     For against you the king of Babylon
           hath taken counsel, and hath come to a determination, saying,
     31 "Arise and go up against a wealthy nation dwelling at ease
           who have neither gates nor bars nor bolts—who dwell alone.
     32 Let their camels be for a prey and the multitude of their
           cattle for slaughter."                     For I will winnow with everv wind
           them who have their foreheads shaven and from all sides I
                 VOL. II.                                             3 T
         Ch. L.                     JEKEMIAS.
         33 will bring destruction on them, saith the Lord. And the court
             shall be a lodging place for ostriches and a waste forever.No
             man shall abide there, nor shall a son of man there make his
             dwelling.
             XXXVII. In the beginning of the reign of king Sedckias
                            came this word concerning Ailam.
                THUS saith the Lord, The bow of Ailam is broken, the
         36 instrument of his dominion.  And I will bring upon Ailam four
             winds from the four quarters of heaven and I will scatter them
             with these winds ; so that there shall not be a nation to which
         37 the outcasts of Ailam shall not come.  And I will terrify them
            before their enemies who seek their lives ; and bring against
            them according to the fury of my wrath, and send against
         38 them my sword, until it utterly consume them.   And I will set
            my throne in Ailam and drive thence kings and nobles.   But it
            shall come to pass at the last of these days I will bring back
            the captivity of Ailam, saith the Lord.
         L.    XXXVIII. A word of the Lord which he spake against
                                      Babylon.
                PEOCLAIM among the nations, publish and conceal
            not—say, Babylon is taken; Bel is confounded ; the fear-
          3 less, the luxurious Mairodach is delivered up. For a nation is
            gone up against her from the north, which will make her land
            a desolation, so that none shall dwell therein, neither man nor
          4 beast.  In those days, even at that time, shall come up the chil-
            dren of Israel, they and the children of Juda together : walk-
            ing slow and weeping they will march on seeking the Lord
          5 their God.   They will ask the way to Zion ; for thitherward
            they will set their face ; and they will come and flee to the Lord
            their God ; for the everlasting covenant shall not be forgotten.
          6 My people have been lost sheep.       Their shepherds caused
            them to stray.  On the mountains they caused them to wander.
          7 From mountain to hill they roamed.     They forgot their place
            of rest. All that found them devoured them.     Their enemies
            said, " Let us not spare them because they sinned against the
          8 Lord."   He who gathered their fathers hath a pasture of right-
            eousness : remove out of Babylon and from the country of the
          9 Chaldeans, and go out and be like dragons before sheep.   For
      Ch L.                                          JEREMIAS.
            lo! I am raising up against Babylon assemblies of nations
            from the north ; and they shall be drawn up in array against
            her.       Thence one shall be taken like the dart of a skilful war-
       10 rior which shall not rebound in vain.                                 So Chaldea shall be for
      11 a prey.            All that plunder it shall be satisfied.                            Because you re-
            joiced and triumphed when you were plundering my heritage
            —because you frisked about like calves in a pasture, and
      12 brandished your horns like bulls ; your mother shall be great-
            ly ashamed : she who brought you forth for prosperity shall
            be confounded.                Being the hindmost of nations, a desert be-
            cause of the wrath of the Lord, she shall not be inhabited ; but
      13 shall be entirely a desolation.                                Sorrow will cover the coun-
            tenance of all who travel through Babylon ; and at all their ca-
      14 lamity they will express pity.                                 Set yourselves in array all
            around against Babylon.                        All ye who bend the bow shoot at
      15 her : spare not your arrows, you must needs subdue her.                                                    Her
                                                                                                                r       is
            hands are weakened ; her bulwarks have fallen, and her wall
            undermined.              Because it is a vengeance from the Lord; exe-
      16 cute vengeance on her.                        As she hath done, do ye to her.                              De-
            stroy utterly the seed of Babylon, him who handleth the sickle
            in harvest.            Let them return from the face of the Grecian
            sword, every one to his own people ; and let every one flee to
            his own land.
      17          Israel was a wandering sheep.                         Lions scared him away.                      The
            first who devoured him was the king of Assur, and this last, the
      18 king of Babylon gnawed his bones.                                     Therefore thus saith the
            Lord, Behold I will execute vengeance on the king of Babylon
      19 andhis land as I executed vengeance on the king ofAssyria. And I
            will bring back Israel to his pasture, and he shall feed on Carmel,
            and on mount Ephraim, and on Galaad ; and his soul shall be
      20 satisfied.            In those days and at that time, search shall be made
            for the iniquity of Israel ; but none shall remain : and for the
            sins of Juda; but none shall be found.                                   For I will be merciful
            to them who are left.
      21          With respect to this land, saith the Lord.                                  Go up with bit-
            terness against it and against them who dwell in it ; take ven-
            geance,             sword, and destroy utterly ; saith the Lord, and do
            according to all that I command thee.
      22          A sound of battle and great distress in the land of the
      23 Chaldeans!                 How the hammer of the whole earth is broken
                                  JEREMIAS.
        Oh. L.
           and dashed to pieces !  How Babylon is become a desolation
        24 among the nations !   They will come upon thee and thou shalt
           not know—like Babylon itself and thou shalt be taken.   Thou
           art found out and taken, because thou didst set thyself against
           the Lord.
        25    The Lord hath opened his arsenal and brought out the in-
           struments of his wrath ; because the Lord G-od hath a work
           to perform in the land of the Chaldeans.
        26    Because her time is come; open ye her treasuries, search
           her like a cave ; and destroy her utterly. Let not a remnant
        27 of her be left.Lay waste all her fruits and let them go down
           to destruction.
              (p) Alas for them ; for their day is come and the time of
        28 their visitation !Hark ! a sound of men fleeing and escaping
           out of the land of Babylon to inform Sion of the vengeance of
           the Lord our God.                          Babylon—to
        29     (J) Issue these orders to many against              every
           one bending a bow—"Encamp against her round about ; let
           none escape out of her."  Render to her according to her works
           —according to all that she hath done, do ye to her.Because she
        30 set herself against the Lord, the holy God of Israel, therefore
           her young men shall fall in her streets and all her mighty war-
           riors shall be laid low, saith the Lord.
        31     Behold I am against thee, thou essence of haughtiness,
           saith the Lord.  Because thy day is come and the time of thy
        32 punishment ; therefore thy haughtiness shall be abated and fall,
           and none shall continue to support it.For I will kindle a fire
           in her forest, which shall devour all around her.
        33     Thus saith the Lord, The children of Israel and the chil-
            dren of Juda have both been oppressed; all who captivated
            them tyrannised over them.
        34     Because they refused to let them go; therefore their Re-
            deemer—the Mighty One, whose name is The Lord Almighty
            will plead their cause with their adversaries.In order that he
            may remove this land out of the way he will sharpen for the
        35 inhabitants of Babylon a sword against the Chaldeans and
            against the inhabitants of Babylon; and against her grandees
        36 and against her counsellors—a sword against her warriors and
            they shall be destroyed ; a sword against their horses and
        37 against their chariots—a sword against their warriors and
    Ch. LI.                    JEKEMIAS.
       the mixed multitude in the midst of her and they shall be like
       women—a sword against her treasures ; and they shall be
    38 rifled ; against them who are on her waters and they shall be
       exposed to shame.
           Because it is a land of the graven images and it was in
    39 these islands where they boasted therefore imageries shall
       dwell in those islands and in her shall dwell the daugh-
    40 ters of Sirens and she shall never more be inhabited.   As God
       overthrew Sodom and Gomorra and the neighbouring cities,
       said the Lord, no man shall dwell there, nor shall a son of man
    41 make his abode there.    Behold a people is coming from the
       north, even a mighty nation, and many kings shall be roused up
       from the extremity of the earth handling the bow and sword.
    42 They are haughty and will shew no mercy : their voice will roar
       like the sea.  On horses they will come prancing, in array like
    43 fire, for battle against thee,daughter of Babylon.    The king
       of Babylon heard the report of them and his hands were en-
       feebled ; anguish seized him like the pangs of a woman in tra-
    44 vail.  Behold he will be like the lion which must go up from the
       swelling of Jordan to Gaitham, for I will speedily drive men
       from her, and set every youth against her : for who is like me
       and who can withstand me ?   And who is the shepherd who can
    45 stand before me ?   Therefore hear the counsel which the Lord
       hath taken against Babylon ; and the determination he is come
       to against the Chaldean inhabitants, let all but the lambs of
       the flock to destroyed ; let all but a pasture for them be made
    46 a desolation.  For at the sound of the capture of Babylon the
       earth shall be shaken, and a scream shall be heard among the
       nations.
    LI.     Thus said the Lord.   Behold against Babylon and against
       the Chaldean inhabitants I am raising up a hot destroying wind.
     2 And against Babylon I will send scorners who will treat her
        with scorn and waste her land. Woe shall surround Babylon on
     o all sides on the day of her affliction.Let him, who bendeth the
        bow, bend it ; and him, who hath armour put it on ; shew no
     4 compassion to her youths, and destroy utterly all her host.And
        let the wounded fall in the land of the Chaldeans, and those
        who are pierced through, fall in her streets.
     5     (p)  Since Israel and Juda are not quite forsaken by their
         Ch. LI.                       JEREMIAS.
             God, the Lord Almighty, on account of their land being filled
          6 with iniquity by reason of the sanctuaries of Israel ; flee out of
             Babylon and save every one his life and be not involved, in her
             iniquity.  For the time of her punishment is come from the
          7 Lord, and he is rendering to her a recompence.           Babylon was
            a golden cup in the hand of the Lord, furnishing a plentiful
             draught to all the nations.      Of her wine the nations drank,
          8 therefore they reeled.    But Babylon is suddenly fallen and bro-
             ken.   Utter a lamentation for her.       Get balm for her deadly
             wound; perhaps she may be cured.
          9     (c)   We have administered, medicines to Babylon, but
             she is not healed.    Let us leave her and depart every one to
            his own land : for her judgment hath reached to heaven and
         10 mounted up to the stars.      The Lord hath published his decree.
             Come let us proclaim in Sion the works of the Lord our God.
         11     (p)   Prepare the arrows.     Fill the quivers.    The Lord hath
            stirred up the spirit of the king of the Medes.        For his wrath
             is against Babylon to destroy her utterly.       For it is the ven-
         12 geance of the Lord—the avengement of his people.               On the
             walls of Babylon erect a standard ; set the watch ; have arms
            ready.   Because the Lord hath undertaken; therefore he will
             accomplish what he hath spoken against the inhabitants of Ba-
         13 byIon—against them who dwell on many waters, and against
            the multitude of her treasures.      Thine end is come, it is come
         14 indeed into thy bowels : for the Lord hath sworn by his arm,
             "I will fill thee with men as with locusts; and they who go
             down shall utter a sound against thee."
         15     (c)   The Lord is he who made the earth by his power,
             who fitted up the world by his wisdom.        By his understanding
         16 he stretched out the heaven.      At his voice there was in heaven
             a sound of water, and he brought up clouds from the extremi-
         17 ty of the earth.    He made the lightning for rain and brought
             out light from his treasuries.      Every man by knowledge be-
            came stupefied, every melter of gold was put to shame for his
             graven images; for their molten images were falsehoods, there
         18 is no breath in them.     They are works of vanity and objects of
         19 derision.   In the time of their visitation they shall perish.    The
            portion of Jacob is not such as these, for he who formed all
            things is his inheritance : his name is the Lord.
                                                                                                                 ;;
                                                   JEEEMIAS.
        Ch. LI.
        20         (J)     Thou art dispersing for rne implements oi' war, but
             in thee I will disperse nations and remove kings out of thee
        21 and in thee I will disperse the horse and his rider ; and in thee
        22 I will disperse chariots and charioteers ; and in thee I will dis-
             perse the youth and the virgin ; and in thee I will disperse the
        23 husband and the wife ; and in thee I will disperse the shepherd
             and the flock ; and in thee I will disperse the husbandman and
             his husbandry ; and in thee I will disperse the generals and
        24 leaders of armies, and retribute to Babylon and all the Chal-
             dean inhabitants all the evils which they have done to Sion in
        25 your sight, saith the Lord.                       Behold I am against thee,                       cor-
             rupted mountain which corruptest the whole earth, and I will
             stretch out my hand against thee and roll thee down on rocks
              and I will make thee like a mountain which hath been burned
             to ashes, so that they shall not take of thee a stone for a corner
             nor a stone for a foundation.                    For thou shalt be a desolation for
        27 ever, saith the Lord.                  Erect a standard in the land.                      Sound a
             trumpet among the nations.                       Prepare the nations against her.
             Issue orders against her.                   Carry them,             kings, from me even
             to the Achanazeans. Erect towers against her. Bring up against
        28 her, cavalry like a multitude of locusts.                            Bring up against her
             nations, the king of the Medes and of the whole earth—his
             generals and all the leaders of his army.
        29         (p)     The earth was in commotion and oppressed with
             toil,    because the determination of the Lord against Baby-
             lon had roused it, to make the land of Babylon a desolation
        30 and uninhabitable.                    The warriors             of   Babylon declined to
              fight.      They will sit still there during a siege.                            Their migh-
        31 ty power is broken.                      They are become like women.                             Her
             habitations are burned with fire.                        Her bars are broken.                 Cou-
             rier will run to meet courier and messenger to meet mes-
        32 senger to tell the king of Babylon that his city is taken—that
             the passages one after another are forced—that the barriers
             are burned with fire and his warriors are fleeing.                             For thus said
        30 the Lord, the houses of the king of Babylon shall be threshed
              like a floor full of ripe grain.                Yet a little while and her harvest
              will come.
        34         (c)     She devoured me ; she chewed me to pieces : thick
              darkness overwhelmed me.                      Nabuchodonosar king of Babylon
                 1                                                                 !
                                                                  JEREMIAS.
                Cb. LI.
                      swallowed Die down ; like a dragon he tilled his belly with my
                      dainties.          They have cast me up.
               35           (p)       Let the inhabitants of Sion say, My troubles and my
                      miseries be upon Babylon ! and let Jerusalem say, My blood
                      be upon the Chaldean inhabitants
               36           (J) For this cause, thus saith the Lord, Behold I will
                     judge thine adversary and avenge thy cause ; and I will drain
               37 off her sea and make her fountain dry, and Babylon shall be a
               38 desolation and shall not be inhabited.                                       Because they roused to-
               39 gether like lions and like lions' whelps ; in their heat I will
                     give them a draught and make them drunk ; that they may be
                     stupefied and sleep a perpetual sleep and never awake, saith
                     the Lord.
               40           (p)      Down, down with them, like lambs to slaughter and
               41 like rams and he goats.                               How the boast of the whole earth
                     is    hunted and taken ! how Babylon has become a desolation
               42 among the nations !                         The sea came up against Babylon with its
               43 roaring waves, and she is overwhelmed.                                          Her cities are become
                     like a land without water, an untrodden desert.                                           Not an indivi-
                     dual can dwell there : nor can a son of man lodge in her.
               44           (J)      I will indeed punish Babylon and bring forth out of
                     her mouth what she hath swallowed.                                     And the nations shall no
                     more be gathered together to her ; nor shall the victims of the
               50 whole earth fall by Babylon.                                 Away from her country, ye who
                     have escaped ; and tarry not ; ye who are far off, remember the
                     Lord ; and let Jerusalem recur to your mind.
               5            (c)      We are ashamed ; because we have heard our re-
                     proach, disgrace hath covered our face; strangers have enter-
                     ed our sanctuaries—into the house of the Lord.
               52           (J)      Therefore            behold the days are coming, saith the
                     Lord, when I will execute vengeance on her graven images,
               53 and among all them her wounded shall fall in that land.                                                           For
                     though Babylon should mount up to heaven—though she forti-
                     fy her walls with all her might, from me shall come forth those
                     who shall destroy her, saith the Lord.
               54           (p)      Asound of screaming in Babylon ! and great destruc-
               55 tion in the land of the Chaldeans !                                    For the Lord hath utterly
                     destroyed Babylon, and put an end to her din, which was like
                     the sound of great waters.                         Her din he hath given up to destruc-
                                                                                                                ;
      Ch. LII.                                   JEREMIAS.
      56 tion.        For misery is come upon Babylon.                           Her warriors are ta-
            ken.      Their bow is confounded ; for God rendereth them re-
            tribution.
                   (J)      The Lord rendereth them retribution ; and he will
            make utterly drunk her leaders and her wise men and her
            generals, saith the king whose name is The Lord Almighty.
      08 Thus saith the Lord, The wall of Babylon was made broad
            It shall be totally demolished and her lofty gates shall be burn-
            ed with fire; and the peoples shall not labour in vain, though
            the nations may at first fail.
      59          THE word which the Lord commanded Jeremias the pro-
            phet to deliver to Saraias son of Nerias son of Maasias when
            he was going from Sedekias king of Jucla to Babylon in the
            fourth year of his reign.                Now Saraias had the charge of the ho-
            mage gifts.
       60         When Jeremias bad written in a book all the evils which
       61 were to come upon Babylon, even all the words above written
            against Babylon, Jeremias said to Saraias ; When thou art come
       62 to Babylon and shalt have seen and read all these words,
            then thou shalt say, "                  Lord, Lord, thou hast spoken against
            this place, that thou wilt destroy it utterly, so that none shall
            dwell therein, neither man nor beast; for it shall be a desola-
       63 tion forever."             And when thou hast finished reading the book,
            then thou shalt tye a stone to it and throw it into the midst of
            the Euphrates, and say, " So shall Babylon sink and rise no
            more by reason of the evils which I bring upon it.
       LII.      XXXIX. SEDEKIAS was twenty one years old when he
            began to reign, and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem and
         4 his mother's name was Ameital.                          She was a daughter of Jere-
            mias of Lobena.             And it came to pass in the ninth year of his
            reign in the fifth month, on the tenth of the month, Nabucho-
            donosar king of Babylon, came with his whole army against
            Jerusalem, and they besieged it and built a wall around it of
            square stones, and the city was besieged until the eleventh
         6 year of king Sedekias.                  On the ninth day of the — month there
            was a grievous famine in the city and there was no bread for
         7 the people of the land.                 When a breach was made into the city,
                     vol. 11.                              3 u
                                                                                                                                             :;
                       LIT.                                       JEREMIAS.
               Oh.
                     all the men who were warriors went out by night by the way
                     of the gate between the outer and the inner wall, which was
                     along the king's garden, (though the Chaldeans were all around
                 8 the city ) and took the road to Araba.                                            And the army of the
                                      ;
                     Chaldeans pursued the king and overtook him on the borders
                      of Jericho.            And all his servants being dispersed from him, they
                 9 took the king and carried him to the king of Babylon at Deb-
               10 latha, who passed sentence on him.                                       And the king of Babylon
                      slew the sons of Sedekias before his eyes.                                      He slew also all the
                11 chiefs of Juda at Deblatha.                              Then he put out the eyes of Sede-
                      kias and bound him with chains.                                 And the king of Babylon led
                      him to Babylon and committed him to the slave prison where
                      he continued till the day of his death.
                12           And on the fifth month on the tenth of the month Nabou-
                      zardan the chief cook, who stood in the presence of the king
                      of Babylon, came to Jerusalem and burned the house of the
                      Lord and the king's house.                               He burned also with fire all the
                14 public buildings of the city and every stately house.                                                      And the
                       army of the Chaldeans which was with the chief cook demo-
                16 lished all the wall of Jerusalem round about. But the chief cook
                       left the remains of the people for vine dressers and husband-
                       men.
                17           The Chaldeans also broke to pieces the pillars of brass
                       which were in the house of the Lord and the bases and the
                       sea of brass which was in the house of the Lord, and took the
                 18 brass and carried it to Babylon with the crown, and the cups
                       and the flesh forks and all the utensils of brass with which they
                 19 sacrificed ; and the Apphoths and the Masmaroths and the oil
                        vessels and the candlesticks and the censers and the cups
                       those which were of gold, or gilded, and those which were of
                 20 silver, or plated, the chief cook took.                                    As for the two pillars and
                        the sea and the twelve oxen of brass under the sea, which
                        king Solomon had made for the house of the Lord, there was
                 21 no weighing the brass thereof.                                  The height of each of the pil-
                        lars was thirty five cubits and a fillet of twelve cubits encir-
                 22 cled it, the thickness of which was four fingers all around.
                        And there was a chapiter of brass on each of them of the height
                        of five cubits with a ball on the top of each and a piece of net
                        work and pomegranates around on each chapiter ; all of brass
                                                                                                                                      :
      Ch. LTI.                                       JEREMIAS.
      23 eight pomegranates to a cubit for trie twelve cubits.                                                        So that
            there were ninety six pomegranates on the sides and all the po-
            megranates on the net work round about were one hundred.
      24           And the chief cook took the chief priest, and the priest
      25 who was second to him, and the three who guarded the way ;
             and a eunuch who was over the men of war, and seven men
             of renown who attended in the king's presence, who were
             found in the city, and the scribe of the armies, who mustered
             the people of the land ; and sixty chief men, of the people of
       26 the country, who were found in the city.                                                These Nabuzardan
             the chief cook, took and brought to the king of Babylon at
       27 Deblatha.                And the king of Babylon slew them at Deblatha
             in the land of Aimath.
       31           And it came to pass in the thirty seventh year of the cap-
             tivity of Jechonias king of Juda, in the twelfth month, on the
              twenty fourth of the month, Oulaimadachar king of Babylon,
              in the first year of his reign, took and raised up the head of
              Jechonias king of Juda, and caused him to be shaven and re-
              leased him from the prison, in which he was confined, and
       32 spoke kindly to him and set his seat above the kings, who
       33 were with him in Babylon.                                   And changed his prison dress, and
              caused him to eat in his presence, all the days of his life.
        34           And he had a portion continually given to him, day by
              day, from the king of Babylon, to the day of his death.
                              THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAS.
        I.                 After Israel was carried into captivity, and Jerusalem was
                     laid waste ; Jcremias sat down and ivcpt, and sung this song
                     of woe over Jerusalem, and said.
           1            HOW solitary sitteth the city which was full of people!
               she who was abundant among nations is become like a wi-
               dow ! the empress of provinces is become tributary !
           2          She wept sore by night and her tears are on her cheeks
               and of all her lovers there is none to comfort her.                                                       All her
               friends dealt treacherously with her.                                      They became her ene-
                mies.
            3          Judea is forced to emigrate.                               On account of her humilia-
                tion and because of her great servitude, she sat down among
                     —
                                   LAMENTATIONS.
          Ch. I.
             the nations ; she found no rest.   All her persecutors found her
             among them who were afflicting her.
           4     The highways of Sion mourn ; because none attend her
             festivals. All her gates are desolate. Her priests groan bitterly.
             Her virgins are carried away ; and she is by herself in bit-
             terness.
           5     They who afflict her are become her head ; and her ene-
             mies prosper.    Because the Lord hath humbled her for the
             multitude bf her transgressions ; her children are gone into
             captivity before the oppressor.
           6     From the daughter of Sion all her comeliness is taken
             away.   Her chiefs were like rams which could find no pasture ;
             and they came without strength in view of the pursuer.
          7      In the days of her humiliation and rejection, Jerusalem re-
             membered all the good things which she had in days of old.
             When her people fell into the hands of the oppressor, and
             there was none to help her ; her enemies seeing this, laughed
             at her festivals held in commemoration of her settlement.
          8      Jerusalem sinned grievously, therefore she became unstable
             as a wave.   By all that honoured her she hath been humbled,
             for they saw her nakedness, while she sighing turned away
             her face.
          9      Her uncleanness was before her feet.       She was insensible
             to her extreme distress.    He hath indeed lowered her haugh-
             tiness ; there is none who comforteth her.        Lord, behold my
             affliction because the enemy is magnified.
         10      On all the objects of her desire the oppressor hath laid
             his hand ;   for into her sanctuary she saw nations entering,
             concerning whom thou hast commanded that they should not
             come into thy congregation.
         11     All her people were sighing deeply, seeking bread.         They
             gave up the objects of her desire, for meat to preserve life.
             Look down, O Lord, and see how she is dishonoured.
         12      (s)  Ho! all ye who travel the way turn and see ! is there
             any sorrow like this of mine, which he hath denounced against
             me.   The Lord hath humbled me in the day of his fierce in-
             dignation.
                            (s) Sion, or the city of Jerusalem.
     Ch. II.                  LAMENTATIONS.
     13     From his loftiness he hath sent a fire ; he brought it in
        among my bones.      He hath spread a net for my feet and turn-
        ed me backwards.     He hath made me desolate and full of sor-
        row, all the live long day.
     14     He hath kept a watch on my transgressions.            They are
        wreathed round my hands.      They have reached up to my neck.
        My strength is enfeebled.     For into my hands the Lord hath
        sent pains.   I cannot stand.
     15     From amidst me the Lord hath moved all my mighty
        men.    He hath brought upon me the time for crushing my
        chosen bands.    The Lord trod out a vat for the virgin daugh-
     16 ter of Juda.   For these things I mourn.     Mine eye hath flowed
        with water, because my comforter, he who is the supporter
        of my life, is far removed from me.      My children are vanished
        because the enemy hath prevailed.
     17     (p) Sion stretched forth her hand ; there is none to com-
        fort her.  The Lord gave a command respecting Jacob ; around
        him are they who afflict him.      Jerusalem became among them,
        like one set apart as unclean.
     18     (s)  The Lord is righteous ; for against his express com-
         mandment I rebelled.     Hear I beseech you all ye peoples and
        behold my sorrow! my virgins and my young men are gone
        into captivity.
     19     I called on my lovers ; but they with false excuses deceiv-
        ed me.    My priests and my elders expired in the city, because
        they sought food to support their lives, but found none.
     20     Look,      Lord! because of my distress my bowels are
        troubled; and my heart within me is distracted, because I
        have grievously rebelled.      Abroad the sword, and at home
        death have bereaved me of children.
     21     Hear, I beseech thee ! because I groan ; there is none to
        comfort me.    All mine enemies heard of my calamities, and
        rejoiced at what thou hast done.    Thou hast brought on a day :
     22 thou hast proclaimed a time.     They were like me, let all their
        wickedness come before thee.      Make search for them as they
        have made search for all my transgressions.        For my groans
        are many, and my heart is afflicted with grief.
     II.     OH! how the Lord hath in his wrath covered with dark-
        Oh. II.               LAMENTATIONS.
           ness the daughter of Sion ! he hath cast down, from heaven,
           upon the earth, the glory of Israel ; and hath not remember-
           ed his own footstool.
         2    In the day of his indignation the Lord overwhelmed and
           did not spare ; in his wrath he destroyed all the comeliness of
           Jacob : he levelled to the ground the strong holds of the daugh-
           ter of Juda. He brought contempt on her king, and her chiefs.
         3 In his fierce anger he broke the whole horn of Israel : he
           turned back his right hand from before his enemy : he kind-
           led in Jacob a flaming fire, which devoured all around.
         4    He bent his bow like an opposing enemy—like an adversa-
           ry he strengthened his right hand and slew all the desires of
           mine eyes.  In the tent of the daughter of Sion he poured out
           his wrath like fire.
         5    The Lord became like an enemy.    He overwhelmed Israel.
           He sunk her palaces.   He destroyed his own munitions, and
           multiplied on the daughter of Juda humiliation on humiliation.
         6    He laid open like a vineyard his own dwelling ; he marred
           his own festivals.The Lord forgot the festivals and sabbaths
           which he had established in Sion, and by the rebuke of his an-
           ger vexed king and priest and chief.
         7     The Lord hath cast off his altar ; he hath shaken off his
           sanctuary. With the hand of an enemy he hath demolished
           the wall of her palaces.They uttered a shout in the house of
           the Lord as on the day of a festival.
         8     He turned back to destroy the wall of the daughter of Si-
           on ; he stretched out a measuring line : he withdrew not his
           hand from destruction ; so the outer wall mourned and the in-
           ner wall languished with it.
         9     Her gates were dashed to the ground : he destroyed and
           broke to pieces her bars, her king and her chiefs among the
           nations.  Law is no more; and her prophets saw not a vision
           from the Lord.
         10    The elders of the daughter of Sion sat on the ground.
           They were silent. They heaped dust on their heads ; they gird-
            ed themselves with sackcloth.He humbled to the ground the
            virgin princesses in Jerusalem.
        11     Mine eyes failed with tears ; my heart was astounded.My
            glory was poured on the ground for the distress of the daugh-
                                           !                                                                                        ;
              II.                                LAMENTATIONS.
      Ch.
            ter of my people when the infant and suckling expired in the
            streets of the city.
     12           To their mothers they said, " Where is corn and wine,"
            when they were fainting like wounded men in the streets of
            the city—when they were pouring out their souls in their mo-
            thers' bosom.
      13           What shall I take to witness for thee ?                                       Or to what shall I
            liken thee,               daughter of Jerusalem ?                         Who can save and com-
            fort thee,             virgin daughter of Sion ?                          Because thy cup of ruin
            hath been large, who can heal thee ?
      14           Thy prophets saw vanities and follies for thee ; they made
            no revelations against thine iniquity to turn away thy captivity,
             but saw for thee false burdens and expellings.
      15           All that passed by clapped their hands for thee, they ex-
             pressed the sound of pity and shakecl their heads for the daugh-
             ter of Jerusalem.                  Is this, say they, the city, the crown of joy of
             the whole earth
      16           Against thee all thine enemies opened their mouth; they
             hissed and gnashed their teeth and said, We have swallowed
             her up ; but this is the day we looked for ; we have found it
             we have seen it.
       17           The Lord hath done what he purposed.                                           He hath executed
             his decree, what he enjoined in days of old.                                           He hath destroy-
             ed and hath not spared.                           He hath caused an enemy to rejoice
       18 over thee.                He hath exalted the horn of thine oppressor.                                           Their
             heart cried to the Lord.                               !  walls of Sion cause tears to flow
             down like a torrent day and night.                                  Give thyself no rest ; let not
       19 the daughter of thine eyes be silent.                                       Arise, chant praise in the
             night at setting thy watch. Pour out thy heart like water before
              the Lord ; lift up thy hands to him for the life of thine infants,
              who are perishing with hunger at the head of every street.
       20           Look,             Lord, and see.                 For whom hast thou caused such
              a search to be made ?                      Shall women eat the fruit of their womb !
              The cook hath made search !                                  Shall infants at the breast be
              butchered ?              Wilt thou slay in the sanctuary of the Lord, priest
              and prophet ?
        21           On the high way lie the youth and the elder.                                                My virgins
              and my young men are gone into captivity ; with sword and
               with famine thou hast slain ; in the day of thine anger thou
               hast slaughtered and hast not spared.
             III.              LAMENTATIONS.
        Ch.
        22     He called my sojourners from all around to a solemn festi-
            val, so that in the day of the indignation of the Lord none
            escaped or were left.As I excelled in power so have I multi-
            plied all mine enemies.
        III.    I AM a man who have seen affliction by the rod of his
         2 wrath against me.   He hath seized me and dragged me into
         3 darkness and there is no light.  But still he turned his hand
            against me all the day long.
         4     He hath made my flesh and my skin old ; he hath broken
         5 my bones.   He built up against me and encompassed my head
         6 and afflicted it with pain : in dark mansions he placed me like
            the dead of old.
         7     He built up against me so that I cannot get out. He made
         8 my chain heavy.    Though I scream and cry, he shut out my
         9 prayer.  He walled up my ways ; he blocked up my paths ; he
           terrified me.
        10     He was as a bear lying in wait ; to me he was like a lion in
        11 secret coverts. He pursued me when I fled and stopped me.
        12 He removed me quite out of sight.    He bent his bow and set
        13 me up as a mark for his arrow.    He poured into my reins the
           darts of his quiver.
        14     I  became a subject of laughter to all my people—their
        15 song all the day long.   He glutted me with wormwood ; he
           gave me a large draught of gall, and broke my teeth with
        16 gravel.  He drenched me with ashes.   He removed my soul far
        17 from peace.  I forgot prosperity ; so my strength was destroy-
        18 ed and the hope which I had from the Lord.   I recollected be-
        19 cause of mine affliction. When by reason of persecution, my
        20 bitterness and gall shall be remembered ; then on myself will
        21 my soul meditate.  I will lay this up in my heart. On this ac-
        22 count I will wait for the mercies of the Lord, because he hath
           not quite forsaken me—because his compassion is not ex-
           hausted.  In the ensuing months,       Lord, exercise compas-
           sion, since we are not quite consumed—since thy mercies are
        23 not exhausted.  New every morning is thine abundant faithful-
        24 ness.  The Lord is my portion, saith my soul, therefore I will
        25 wait for him.  The Lord is gracious to them who wait for him
        26 for the soul, that will seek him, there is good ; let it therefore
        27 wait quietly for the salvation of the Lord.It is good for a man
                                                                               a;
     Ch. III.                   LAMENTATIONS.
     28 when he hath bornea yoke in his yonth.         He will sit solitary and
     30 be silent, because he hath taken it upon him.        He will give his
     31 cheek to him who smiteth it ; he will feed on reproaches ; be-
     32 cause the Lord will not cast off forever—because he who hath
     33 humbled will have compassion, even according to the multi-
     34 tude of his mercies.       He did not answer from his heart and
     35 humble the children of men with an intent to crush under his
     36 feet all the prisoners of the earth ; to turn aside the cause of
         man from before the Most High.         To condemn a man when he
         is on his trial, the Lord hath not enjoined.
     37      (a) Who ever enjoined thus ; when it hath happened, hath
         not the Lord ordered it ?
     38      (b) From the mouth of the Most High shall not ills pro-
     39 ceed as well as good?        Why should a living man murmur—
     40 man for his sin offering ? Our way hath been searched and tried
     41 let us then return to the Lord.        Let us offer up our hearts on
     42 our hands to Him who is High in heaven.           We have sinned ; we
         have been guilty of impiety ; and thou hast not been appeased.
     43 Thou hast covered with wrath and discarded us ; thou hast
     44 slain and hast not spared ; thou hast covered thyself with a
         cloud because of prayer, that I may shut mine eyes and be
     45 cast off.   Thou hast placed us in the midst of the peoples ; all
     46 our enemies have opened their mouths against us.             On us are
     47 come terror and wrath, desolation and               destruction.    Let
     48 streams of water be collected by mine eye, for the destruction
     49 of the daughter of my people.        Mine eye is bathed in tears and
     50 I cannot keep silence that it may dry, until the Lord look
     51 down from heaven and behold.           Let mine eye be more watch-
     52 ful for my life, than all the daughters of a city.     With eagerness
     53 all mine enemies have hunted me like an ostrich ; without
     54 cause they have condemned me to die in a dungeon, and placed
         a stone over me.      Water was poured above upon my head.            I
     55 said, I am cast off.     I called on thy name, O Lord, out of the
     56 deepest dungeon.       Thou hast heard my voice ; stop not thine
      57 ear against my supplication.      To my assistance thou didst draw
         near.    On the day I called on thee, thou saidst to me, Fear not.
                        (a)  An objection,   (b) The answer.
             VOL. II.                   3 X
                              !                                                                                     —;
              Ch. I V.                             LAMENTATIONS.
              58 Thou, O Lord, hast pleaded the causes of my soul ; thou hast
              59 redeemed my life.                 Thou,         Lord, hast seen my wrongs ; thou
              60 hast decided my cause.                    Thou hast seen all their vengeance
              61 into all their devices against me.                          Thou hast heard their re-
              62 proach—all their charges against me—the speeches of them
             63 who accused me ; their studied harangues against me all the day
             64 long.         At their sitting down and their rising up, look down on
             65 their eyes.            Thou,         Lord, wilt render them a recompence ac-
             66 cording to the works of their hands.                            Thou wilt give them for
                   a shield the sorrow of my heart.                       Thou wilt pursue them with
                   indignation, and destroy them utterly from under heaven.
             IV.             HOW gold can be tarnished ! How pure silver can be
                   changed ! Holy stones were shot down at the head of all the
                   outlets.
               2        The sons of Sion who were precious, more precious than
                   gold; how they have been accounted as earthen vessels, the
                   works of a potter's hands.
               3        Surely jackals drew out the breasts; their whelps suckled
                   the daughters of my people, to make them unnatural as the
                   ostrich in the desert.
               4        The tongue of a sucking babe cleaved to the roof of its
                   mouth for thirst: infants asked for bread, there is none who
                   breaketh it for them.
               5        They who had fed upon dainties perished in the highways
                   they who had been nursed in scarlet were covered with dung.
               6        The transgression of the daughter of my people was greater
                  than that of Sodom which was overthrown suddenly, without
                  tiring hands with it.
               7        Her Nazarites were purer than snow ; they were whiter than
                  milk.       They were more ruddy than a sapphire.                               Behold their
                  change
              8        Their visage became blacker than soot.                                  They are not
                  distinguished in the streets.                   Their skin is shrivelled to their
                  bones.       They are withered.               They are become like a stick.
              9        The victims of the sword are more beautiful than those
                  slain by famine.            These stalked about pierced through for want
                  of the fruits of the field.
             10        The hands of tender-hearted women boiled their own chil-
                  dren ; these were food for them in the extreme distress of the
                  daughter of my people.
                                                                                                                           !
         Ch. V.                                   LAMENTATIONS.
         11          The Lord hath executed his wrath—he hath poured out
               his fierce anger.               He hath kindled a fire in Sion, which hath
               devoured her very foundations.
         12          The kings of the earth ; all the inhabitants of the world did
               not believe that an enemy and a destroyer could have entered
               the gates of Jerusalem.
         13          Because of the sins of her prophets ; the iniquities of her
               priests ;      of them who were shedding innocent blood, in the
               midst of her, (her watchmen shuddered in the streets, they were
               polluted with blood, as they could not but have touched their
         15 clothes. " Stand off from the unclean." Call to them " Stand off
              Stand off! touch not " because they had been touched they shud-
              dered.) Say among the nations, Let them no longer sojourn there.
         16         The presence of the Lord was their portion ; he will no
              more look upon them : they paid no respect to the presence of
              priests ; on prophets they had no compassion.
         17         While we yet existed our eyes failed looking in vain for
              our help.           When we looked out, we looked to a nation that
              could not save.
        18          We have hunted for our little ones that they might not
              walk in our streets.                  Our time is come.                  Our days are fulfilled.
              Our time is at hand.
        19          They who pursue us are swifter than eagles in the air ; they
              overtook us on the mountains.                            They lay in wait for us in the
              desert.
        20          In their slaughters is comprehended the breath of our nos-
              trils, our anointed Lord, of whom we said, Under his shadow
              we shall live among the nations.
        21          Kejoice and be glad,                         daughter of Idumea who dwellest
              in the land.              To thee however the cup of the Lord will come
              and thou shalt drink and vomit.
        22               daughter of Sion, thine iniquity is done away.                                        He will
              no more banish thee.                   He hath visited thine iniquities,                          daugh-
              ter of Edom.              He hath exposed thee for thy sins.
        V.          KEMEMBEK,                       Lord, what hath befallen us : look down
          2 and behold our reproach.                        Our inheritance is transferred to stran-
          3 gers ; our houses to foreigners.                            We are become orphans.                       Our
         Ch. V.                    LAMENTATIONS.
          4 father is no more.      Our mothers are like widows. Our water
             we have drunk for money.        Our wood came by barter on our
          5 shoulders.    We have been persecuted.       We have laboured and
          6 have had no rest.      Egypt laid to a hand ; Assyria, till they
          7 were satisfied.    Our fathers sinned ;     they are no more.      We
          8 have borne their transgressions.        Slaves have got dominion
          9 over us ; there is none to deliver us out of their hand.       At the
             peril of our lives we must gather in our corn, because of the
         10 sword of the desert.     Our skin is black as an oven.       They are
         11 shrivelled up by storms of famine.          Our wives are humbled
         12 in Sion; our virgins in the cities of Juda.          Our chiefs were
             hanged up by their hands ; our elders were held in no esteem.
         13 Our warriors took up a lamentation; and our youths fainted
         14 under a club.     Our elders have ceased to attend at the gates,
         15 and our chosen men have ceased from their songs.              The joy
             of our heart is at an end ; our dance is turned into mourning.
         16 Our crown is fallen from our head ; alas for us ! for we have
         17 sinned.    Because of this, grief is come upon us—our heart is
         18 full of sorrow :   because of this, our eyes are dim.       On mount
         19 Sion, because it is desolate, foxes have walked about.             But
             thou,    Lord, wilt inhabit it forever :   thy throne is for all ge-
         20 nerations.    Why wilt thou utterly forget us ?      Wilt thou leave
         21 us for length of days ? Turn us to thee,        Lord, and we shall be
         22 turned and renew our days as heretofore.          Because thou wast
             cast off, thou hast cast us off;  thou hast been provoked against
             us to a high degree.
                                        EZEKIEL.
         I.        In the thirtieth year, and fourth month, on the fifth day
           2 of the month, when I was among the captives by the river
             Chobar, the heavens were opened and I saw the visions of
             God.    On the fifth of that month (this was the fifth year of the
           3 captivity of king Jechonias) the word of the Lord came to
             Ezekiel son of Buzi the priest, in the land of the Chaldeans,
             by the river Chobar.      And the hand of the Lord was upon me,
             and I looked, and lo !     a whirlwind came from the north, and
             with it a great cloud surrounded with a splendor of flashing
             fire ; and in the midst thereof, an appearance like that of am-
                                                                                                    —;
     Ch. I.                                   EZEKIEL.
       5 ber in the middle of the fire, and a splendor in it.                          And in the
          middle, a resemblance like that of four living beings.                          And this
       6 was the appearance of them.                   They had a resemblance of a man
       7 in them.         And each had four faces, and each had four wings
                                                                                                      ;
          and their legs were straight and their feet winged and spark-
          ing like sparkling brass.                And their wings had a quick mo-
       8 tion.      And underneath their wings on their four sides was a
       9 man's hand.           And the faces of the four turned not when they
          went.       They marched forward each having a face on every
      10 side.      And with regard to the similitude of their faces, the four
          had the face of a man with the face of a lion, on the right
           and on the left the four had the face of a bullock, and the four
      11 had a face of an eagle.                 And the wings of the four were ex-
           panded upwards, each having a pair expanded adjoining each
      12 other and a pair folded on their body.                         And they moved on,
      13 each straight forward, which way soever the wind was mov-
           ing, they moved on, and turned not.                     And in the midst of the
          four living beings, was an appearance like that of glowing
          coals of fire, resembling lamps whirling round between the
           living beings with a splendor of fire, and from the fire light-
      15 nings flashed.           And I beheld and lo ! on the ground, close to
           the four living beings a wheel ! one to every of the four.
      16 And the apj>earance of the wheels was like the appearance
           of a beryl.         And the four had one and the same likeness.
           And their workmanship was as if there was a wheel within
      17 a wheel.          They ran on their four sections and shifted not
      18 their position when they ran, nor did their felloes when they
           were elevated.           And I beheld, and their felloes were full of
      19 eyes, all around the four.                 And when the living beings moved
           on, the wheels moved on close by them.                                And when the
           living beings mounted up from the earth, the wheels mount-
      20 ed up.          Wherever the cloud was, there was the wind for
           their     movement ; the wheels moved on and were carried
           aloft with them.             Because there was a breath of life in the
      21 wheels, when the living beings moved on, the wheels moved
           on : when those stood still, these stood still : and when those
           mounted up from the earth, these mounted up with them, be-
      22 cause there was a breath of life in the wheels.                            And over the
           head of the living beings, there was a likeness resembling a
                                                                                —:!
               II.                     EZEKIEL.
          Ch.
              firmament, like the appearance of chrystal over their wings,
          23 which were expanded above them.            And their wings which
              were expanded below the firmament, flapped one against ano-
              ther, while every one had a pair that covered their bodies.
          24 And when they moved on I heard the sound of their wings
              like the sound of much water : but when they stopped, their
          25 wings were still.    And lo ! a voice from above the firmament
          26 this being over their heads, there was an appearance like that
              of a sapphire stone and a resemblance of a throne upon it.      And
              upon the resemblance of the throne a resemblance like the ap-
          27 pearance of a man above. And I saw a resemblance of amber from
              the appearance of the loins and upwards ; and from the appear-
              ance of the loins and downwards, I saw an appearance of fire
              and the splendor thereof round about was like the bow which
              is in the clouds in a showery day.      Such was the state of the
              splendor round about.
          II.     THIS was the vision of the likeness of the glory of the
              Lord.   And when I saw it, I fell on my face and I heard a voice
              of one speaking and he said to me, Son of man, stand on thy
           2 feet and I will speak to thee.    Whereupon a blast of wind came
              upon me and took me and lifted me up and set me on my
             feet and I heard him speaking to me and he said to me,
           3     Son of man, I am about to send thee to the house of Israel,
             to them who are provoking me ; who have provoked me, both
           4 they and their fathers even to this day.    And thou shalt say un-
           5 to them, " Thus saith the Lord," whether they hear or be af-
           6 frighted; (for they are a provoking house) and let them know
             that thou art a prophet among them.       And thou son of man, be
             not afraid of them nor daunted at their presence.      Because they
             will sting thee and rise up against thee on all sides and thou
             dwellest in the midst of scorpions, be not afraid of their words
           7 nor terrified at their looks—because they are a provoking
             house, therefore thou shalt deliver my words to them whether
             they hear or be affrighted.
           8     Because they are a provoking house, thou therefore, son of
             man, hear him who is speaking to thee and be not thou rebel-
             lious like this rebellious house.   Open thy mouth and eat what
             I give thee.
           9     Then I looked, and lo ! a hand stretched out towards me
                                  :                                              —
                                      EZEKIEL.
     Ch. III.
         and in it a roll of a book and he unfolded it before me and
         there were writings on it on both sides.         And the writings were
         funeral odes and songs of woe.
     III.     And he said to me, Son of man eat this roll and go and
      2 speak to the children of Israel.         And when he had opened my
      3 mouth and put the roll into it, he said to me, Son of man, Let
        thy mouth eat and thy belly be filled with this roll which is
         given thee.     So I ate it, and it was in my mouth sweet as ho-
      4 ney.    Then he said to me, Son of man, go and get thee to the
      5 house of Israel and speak to them these words of mine, seeing
         thou art sent to the house of Israel—not to a people of strange
      6 language, nor to many tribes of strange and foreign tongues,
         nor to them whose pronunciation is harsh and whose words
        thou canst not understand ; though had I sent thee to such they
      7 might have hearkened to thee.          But the house of Israel will not
        hearken to thee, since they are not willing to hearken to me.
        Because all the house of Israel are contentious and stubborn,
      8 therefore behold I have made thy face strong against their
        faces, and I will invigorate thy struggle against their strug-
      9 gling and it shall be on all occasions firmer than a rock. Be not
        afraid of them nor daunted at their countenance, because they
    10 are a provoking house.          Then he said to me, Son of man, lay
        up in thy heart all the words which I have spoken to thee ; and
    11 having heard with thine ears go get thee to the captivity, to
        the children of thy people, and thou shalt speak to them and
        say to them, " Thus saith the Lord," whether they hear or for-
        bear.
    12      Then a blast of wind took me up and I heard behind me
        a sound of a great earthquake, " Blessed he the glory of the Lord
        from this place of his " whereupon I looked towards the sound
        and saw that this sound of an earthquake was that of the wings
    14 flapping one against another and that of the wheels near them.
        Then the blast lifted me up and bore me aloft and I went by
        the impulse of my own spirit, and the hand of the Lord upon
    15 me was strong, and being borne aloft I came to the captivity
        and went round among them who dwelt by the river Chobar
        among them who were there.            And I abode there seven days
        conversing with them.
    16      And after these seven days a word of the Lord came to me
        Ch. IV.                       EZEKIEL.
        17 saying, Son of man ; I have made thee a watchman to the house
            of Israel ; therefore thou shalt hear a word from my mouth
        18 and warn them from me.       When I say to the unrighteous, Thou
            shalt surely die, and thou hast not warned the unrighteous to
            turn from his ways that he may live; that unrighteous man
            shall die for his iniquity ; but his blood I will require at thy
        19 hand. But if thou hast warned the unrighteous and he will not
            turn from his iniquity and from his way ; that unrighteous man
            shall die for his iniquity, and thou shalt deliver thy soul.     So
            when a righteous man turneth from his righteous acts and
            shall commit transgression though I lay the punishment before
            him ; he shall die.   Because thou hast not warned him, though
            he indeed shall die for his sins (for his righteous acts will not
        21 be remembered ;) yet his blood I will require at thy hand.      But
            if thou hast warned the righteous man not to sin and he sin-
            neth not ; the righteous man shall live ; and because thou hast
            warned him, thou shalt deliver thy soul.
        22      Then the hand of the Lord was upon me ; and he said to
        23 me, Arise and go out to the plain and I will there speak to thee.
            So I arose and went out to the plain ; and behold the glory of
            the Lord stood there like the vision and like the glory of the
            Lord which I saw by the river Chobar.         Whereupon I fell on
         24 my face.   And a blast of wind came upon me and set me on
            my feet, and he spoke to me and said to me, Go and shut thy-
         25 self up in thy house.    Now son of man, behold chains are pre-
            pared for thee; and thou shalt be bound with them and shalt
         26 not get out of them.    And I will bind up thy tongue, that thou
            mayst be dumb and not be to them a reprover, because they
         27 are a rebellious house.   And when I speak to thee, I will open
            thy mouth and thou shalt say to them, Thus saith the Lord,
            whoso heareth let him hear ; and let him who is disobedient, be
         IV.     disobedient, since they are a rebellious house.     And thou
            son of man, take thee a tile and set it before thee and pourtray
          2 thereon the city Jerusalem ; and thou shalt lay siege to it and
            build mounts against it and throw up a circumvallation around
            it and pitch camps against it and arrange the towers for engines
          3 round about.    Then take thee an iron pan and place it as an
            iron wall between thee and the city and set thy face against it
          4 and it shall be besieged and thou shalt besiege it.       This is a
                                                                                                                ;
       Oh. V.                                      EZEKIEL.
             sign for the children of Israel.                      And thou shalt lie on thy left
             side and lay on it the iniquities of the house of Israel.                                Accord-
             ing to the number of the hundred and fifty days which thou
         5 shalt lie upon it thou shalt bear their iniquities.                                 Now I have
             given thee their iniquities to the number of a hundred and
         6 ninety days.             80 when thou hast taken the iniquities of the
             house of Israel and finished them, thou shalt lie on thy right
         7 side and bear the iniquities of the house of Juda forty days.                                        I
             have given thee a day for a year.                      Therefore thou shalt prepare
             thy face for the siege of Jerusalem and strengthen thine arm and
         8 prophesy against it.                And behold I have given chains for thee
             that thou mayst not turn from one of thy sides to the other until
         9 the days of thy siege are accomplished.                               Provide therefore for
             thyself wheat and barley and beans and lentiles and millet and
             rye and put them into an earthen vessel and make them into
             loaves for thyself according to the number of the days which
             thou liest on thy side, to be eaten in the course of a hundred and
       10 ninety days.             And thou shalt eat thy bread by weight, twenty
       11 shekels a day.              From time to time thou shalt eat it : and thou
            shalt drink water by measure, namely the sixth of an hin to be
       12 drunk at stated times.                  And thou shalt eat the loaves baked like
            barley cakes on the hearth, and thou shalt bake them in their
       13 sight with a fire made of human ordure and shalt say, Thus
            saith the Lord the God of Israel, So shall the children of Israel
       14 eat impure meats among the nations.                                Upon this I said, Not
            so :       Lord God of Israel, seeing my soul hath not been pollut-
            ed with impurity.              Even from my birth to this day I have not
            eaten what died of itself, or was torn by wild beasts, nor hath any
       15 tainted flesh ever entered my mouth.                                Thereupon he said to
            me, Behold I have given thee the dung of cattle instead of hu-
       16 man ordure that thou mayst bake thy loaves with it.                                      Moreover
            he said to me, son of man, Behold I break the staff of bread in
            Jerusalem and they shall eat bread by weight and with scanti-
            ness ; and they shall drink water by measure and with faintness
       17 that they may be in want of bread and water and perish, one
            and all, and be wasted away for their iniquities.
       V.         And thou son of man, take thee a knife sharper than a bar-
            ber's razor and having procured such a one thou shalt pass it
            over thy head and thy beard.                       Then thou shalt take a pair of
                  vol. 11.                                3 Y
                                                                                                                      ;;
                                                         EZEKIEL.
              Ch. V.
               2 scales ; and having weighed the hair thou shalt burn the fourth
                   part of it with fire, in the space before the city; during the
                   completion of the days of the siege.                              And thou shalt take
                   another fourth part and burn it in the midst of the city ; and thou
                   shalt hack with the sword another fourth part, around the city
                   and the other fourth part thou shalt scatter to the wind and I will
                3 draw out a sword after them.                   But of this parcel thou shalt take a
                4 few in number and tie them up in thy mantle.                              Yet even of these
                   thou shalt take some and cast them into the midst of the fire and
                   burn them with fire which shall come out of the city and thou shalt
                   say to all the house of Israel thus saith the Lord, This is Jerusa-
                5 lem. I placed her in the midst of nations and the countries around
                6 her, that thou shouldst tell my rules of rectitude to such of the
                   nations as are without law ; and that mine ordinances might be
                   the ordinances of the countries around her.                               Because they re-
                   jected my rules of rectitude and did not walk by mine ordi-
                7 nances ; therefore thus saith the Lord, Because you have taken
                   your bent from the nations around you, and have not walked
                   in my statutes, nor practised my rules of rectitude, nor acted
                   even conformably to the moral precepts of the nations around
                8 you ; therefore thus saith the Lord, Behold I am against thee
                   and in the midst of thee I will execute judgment in the sight
                9 of the nations, and do to thee according to all thine abomina-
                   tions, what I have not done, and the like of which I will not
              10 do any more.              For this cause fathers shall eat children in the
                   midst of thee ; and children shall eat fathers.                             And I will exe-
                   cute judgment upon thee, and scatter all the remnant of thee
              11 to every wind.               For this cause, as I live saith the Lord, Be-
                   cause thou hast polluted my holy things with all thine abomi-
                   nations; therefore I will cast thee off; mine eye shall not spare
              12 nor will I have compassion.                       The fourth part of thee shall be
                   consumed with pestilence; and the fourth part of thee shall
                   perish by famine in the midst of thee ; and the fourth part of
                   thee shall fall by the sword around thee ; and I will make bare
              13 a sword to pursue them.                      And my wrath shall be spent, and
                   mine indignation, on them; and thou shalt know why I the
                   Lord have spoken in my zeal, when I have executed mine in-
              14 dignation on them.                  And I will make thee and thy daughters
     Ch. VI                     EZEKIEI.
         around thee, a desolation, in the sight of every one who pass-
     15 eth by.   And thou shalt be an object of lamentation and hor-
        ror to the nations around thee, when I have executed judg-
         ment on thee with mine avenging wrath : I the lord have
     16 spoken.   For when I have sent against them my shafts of fa-
     17 mine and they shall be for destruction, I will break thy staff
        of bread and send against thee famine and wild beasts; and
        punish thee ; and death and blood shall pass through upon thee :
        and I will bring a sword against thee from all around; I the
        lord have spoken.
     VI      II AGAIN a word of the lord came to me, saying,
        Son of man set thy face against the mountains of Israel and
        prophesy against them and thou shalt say,
      3       mountains of Israel, hear a word of the lord ; Thus saith
        the lord to the mountains and hills, and to the vales and the
        forests, Behold I am bringing a sword against you ; and your
      4 high places shall be destroyed ; and your altars and your tem-
        ples shall be trodden down ; and I will cast down your slain be-
      5 fore your idols ; and scatter your bones around your altars
      6 and in all your dwelling places.  The cities shall be laid waste
        and the high places desolated, that your altars may be utterly
        destroyed : and your idols shall be trampled down, when your
      7 fanes are removed; and your wounded shall fall in the midst
      8 of you ; and you shall know that I am the lord.    When some
        of you, who have escaped from the sword, are among the na-
      9 tions and in your dispersions through the countries ; then shall
        those of you, who have escaped, remember me among the
        nations whither they have been carried captives.   With their
        heart which is going a whoring from me, and with their eyes,
        which are going a whoring after their own devices (I have sworn)
     10 they shall bewail themselves for all their abominations and ac-
        knowledge that I the lord have spoken.
     11     Thus saith the lord, Clap with thy hand, and stamp with
        thy foot, and say, Ha! ha! to all the abominations of the
        house of Israel.  By sword and by pestilence, and by famine
     12 they shall fall. He who is near shall fall by the sword; and
        he who is far off, shall die by pestilence ; and he who is besieged
        shall be consumed by famine.    And I will accomplish my fury
                                                                  —!
        Ch. VII.                 EZEKIEL.
        13 on them.  And you shall know that I am the Lord, when your
           slain are in the midst of your idols, around your altars, on
           every lofty mount, and under every shady tree, where they
        14 offered a sweet smelling savour to all their idols.For I will
           stretch forth my hand against them ; and make the land a de-
           solation and a scene of destruction, from the wilderness of
           Deblatha through all their habitations; and you shall know
           that I am the Lord.
        VII.    III. AGAIN a word of the Lord came to me saying,
         2 And thou son of man say, Thus saith the Lord, To the land
           of Israel an end is coming. The end is come upon the four
         6 wings of the land. The end is coming on thee who inhabitest
         7 the land. The time is come.   The day hath approached, not
         8 with commotions nor with pangs.  Now near at hand I pour
           out mine indignation on thee ; and upon thee I will spend my
           wrath ; and judge thee for thy ways, and retribute to thee all
         9 thine abominations. Mine eye shall not spare, nor will I have
           compassion. Because I will retribute to thee thy ways, when
           thine abominations shall be in the midst of thee; therefore
        3 thou shalt know that it is I the Lord who smite thee.  Now
          the end is upon thee.  I will send it against thee, and punish
          thee for thy ways and retribute to thee all thine abominations.
        4 Mine eye shall not spare, nor will I have compassion.Because
           I will recompense upon thee thy ways, when thine abomina-
          tions shall be in the midst of thee; therefore thou shalt ac-
        5 knowledge that I am the Lord.   For thus saith the Lord, Lo
       11 the end is coming. Behold it is the day of the Lord.If indeed
          the rod hath budded, pride hath come to a full growth.
          Therefore he will break the stay of the unrighteous ; but not
       12 with commotion nor with perturbation.    The end is come.
          Behold the day ! let not him who purchaseth rejoice, nor
       13 him who selleth, mourn; since he who purchaseth shall no
          more return to him who selleth.  Nor will any man hold with
       14 an eye to life. Sound the trumpet and pass sentence on all
       15 together. Abroad let there be battle with the sword, and at
          home famine and pestilence.  Let him who is in the field die
          by the sword ; and them in the city let famine and pestilence
       16 destroy. Now shall they escape who escape from among
                                                                                                                 ;
              VIII.                                 EZEKIEL.
       Ch.
             them? When they shall be on the mountains, I will indeed
             slay all, every one for his iniquities.
       17         All hands shall be enfeebled and all thighs stained with filth.
       18 And they shall gird on sackcloth ; and amazement shall cover
             them.       And shame shall be on all their faces : and on every
       19 head, baldness.               Their silver shall be thrown in the streets;
             and their gold shall be disregarded.                          Their souls shall not be
             satisfied ; nor shall their bellies be filled : because the punish-
       20 ment of their iniquities is come.                            With their choice apparel
             which was laid by for ostentation—even with this they adorn-
             ed the images of their abominations; therefore I have given
       21 it to them for defilement—even into the hand of strangers I
             will deliver it for plunder, and to be a spoil for the ravagers
       22 of the earth ; and they shall defile it.                            And I will turn away
             my face from them; and they shall pollute the places under
             my peculiar inspection, and come into them unobserved, and
       23 profane them and make them an abomination.                                          Because the
       24 land is full of peoples, and the city is full of iniquity ; there-
            fore I will turn back their tumultuous power, and their holy
       25 things shall be polluted.                       Though an atonement shall come
       26 and seek peace, it shall be no more.                              Woe shall succeed woe
            and news be followed by news ; and a vision shall be sought
            from a prophet : and law shall perish from the priest, and
       27 counsel from the elders—the chief shall be clothed with dark-
            ness ; and the hands of the people of the land shall be weak-
            ened.       According to their ways I will deal with them ; and
            for their crimes I will punish them ; and they shall know
            that I am the Lord.
       VIII.           IV.      AGAIN in the sixth year in the fifth month, on
            the fifth of the month as I was sitting at home, and the elders
            of Juda, were sitting before me, the hand of the Lord came
         2 upon me.           And I looked and lo ! a likeness of a man !                                From
            his     loins     downward was fire, and from his loins upward
         3 was an appearance like that of amber.                                    And he stretched
            forth the similitude of a hand and took hold of me by the
            crown of the head and a blast of wind lifted me up between
            heaven and earth, and in a vision of God, brought me to Je-
            rusalem, to the vestibule of the gate facing the north, where
        Ch. VIII.                    EZEKIEL.
          4 was the pillar of the possessor.   And behold the glory of the
            Lord God of Israel was there, such in appearance as I saw
          5 in the plain.  And he said to me, Son of man, look up with
            thine eyes towards the north.    So I looked up with mine eyes
            towards the north, and behold from the north to the gate
          6 facing the east. %*% And he said to me, Son of man hast thou
            seen what they are doing, They are committing great iniqui-
            ties here that they may abstain from my holy things: but
          7 thou shalt see still greater iniquities.  Then he led me into
            the vestibule of the court, and said to me, Son of man, dig.
          8 So I digged and lo ! a door.    And he said to me, Go in and
          9 see the transgressions which they are committing here.      So I
         10 went in and beheld, and lo ! vain abominations and all the idols
         11 of the house of Israel portrayed upon them round about and se-
            venty men of the elders of the house of Israel ; and Jechonias
            the son of Saphan in the midst stood foremost, and every one
            had a censer in his hand, and the smoke of the incense ascend-
         12 ed.  And he said to me, Hast thou seen, son of man, what the
            elders of the house of Israel are doing, every one of them in this
         13 hidden apartment of theirs?    For they said, The Lord doth not
            see.  The Lord hath forsaken this land.     Then he said to me>
            thou shalt see still greater transgressions which they are com-
         14 mitting.  Then he led me to the vestibule of the gate of the
            house of the Lord facing the north, and behold here were wo-
         15 men seated, singing mournful ditties to Thammuz.         ilnd he
            said to me, Son of man, hast thou seen?      Thou shalt see still
         16 worse devices than these.   Then he led me into the inner court
            of the house of the Lord ; and at the vestibule of the temple of
            the Lord, between the ailams and the altar, were about twenty
            men; their backs to the temple of the Lord, and their faces
            the direct contrary way ; and they were worshipping the sun.
         17 And he said to me, Hast thou seen ? Son of man.      Is it a light
            thing for the house of Juda to commit the transgressions, which
            they have committed here ?    Because they have filled the land
            with iniquity, and lo ! they are as it were insulting me to my
               #*# Here something seems to be wanting.    I apprehend, it was
            the people sacrificing to idols on the house tops.
     Oh. IX. X.               EZEKIEL.
     18 face; therefore I will deal with them with wrath.Mine eye
        shall not spare, nor will I have compassion.
     IX.    Then in my hearing he cried with a loud voice and said,
        The punishment of this city is at hand, and every one hath in
      2 his hand the instruments of the destruction.Thereupon behold
        there came from the way of the high gate, which faceth the
        north, six men, every one with his battle axe in his hand ; and
        in the midst of them a man clothed in a long robe and a girdle
      3 of sapphire about his loins.And when they came close to the
        brazen altar, the glory of the God of Israel which was upon
        the cherubims ascended from them and came to the open part
        of the house and called the man who was clothed with the long
        robe and who had a girdle about his loins, and said to him, Go
        through the midst of Jerusalem and put a mark on the forehead
        of those men who are sighing and sorrowing for all the trans-
        gressions which are committed among them ; and to the others
        he said in my hearing, Go ye after him into the city and smite
      6 and spare not with your eyes nor shew compassion. Destroy
        utterly old men and young, virgins and infants and married
        women; but go not near any of those who have the mark on
        them.  Begin at my sanctuary. So they began with the men
                 who rere in the
      7 the elders   w          house. And he said to them, Defile
        this house and fill the ways with dead as you are going out
      8 and continue the slaughter.And while they were slaying them
        I fell on my face and cried aloud and said, Ah ! Lord ! art thou
        utterly destroying the remnant of Israel by pouring out thy
      9 wrath on Jerusalem ? Whereupon he said to me, The iniquity
        of the house of Israel and Juda is exceeding great.Because
        the land is filled with many peoples and the city is filled with
        iniquity and impurity—and because they said, the Lord hath
     10 forsaken this land; the Lord doth not see; therefore mine eye
        shall not spare nor will I have compassion.I have requited
     11 their ways upon their heads.Then, lo ! the man who was cloth-
        ed with the long robe and girded about the loins with the girdle
        came and made report, saying, I have done as thou orderedst
     X.    me.  Thereupon I looked, and behold above the firmament
        which was over the head of the cherubims, there was a resem-
              X.                        EZEKIEL.
         Ch.
          2 blance of a throne above them like a sapphire stone.*              And
             he said to the man who was clothed with the long robe, Go in
             between the wheels which are nnder the cherubims and fill
             thy hands with coals of fire from the midst of the cherubims
             and scatter them over the city.        So in my sight he went in.
          3 Now the cherubims stood on the right side of the house as a
          4 man goeth in, and the cloud filled the inner court.           And the
             glory of the Lord had removed from the cherubims to the open
             part of the house and the cloud filled the house and the court
           5 was filled with the splendour of the glory of the Lord : and the
             sound of the wings of the cherubims was heard to the outer
           6 court like the voice of God Saddai speaking.           And when he
             had given orders to the man clothed with the holy robe, say-
             ino-, Take fire from the midst of the wheels from between the
           7 cherubims and he had gone in and stood near the wheels, one
             stretched out his hand into the midst of the fire, which was be-
             tween the cherubims and took and put it into the hands of
             him who was clothed with the holy robe and he took it and
           8 went out.    Now I saw that the cherubims had the likeness of
           9 men's hands under their wings.          I looked also and lo ! four
             wheels stood close to the cherubims, one wheel close to each
                       and the appearance of the wheels was like the appear-
             cherub ;
          10 ance of a carbuncle stone.       And as for their appearance, the
             four had one and the same likeness, as if there was a wheel
          11 within a wheel.    When they ran, they ran on their four sections.
          12 They altered not their position when they ran, for which way
             soever the foremost looked, they ran and altered not their
          13 position when they ran.        Now their backs and their hands
             and their wings and the wheels were full of eyes all around
          15 the four wheels.     And in my hearing these wheels were call-
             ed Gelgel.     And the cherubims were the same living being
          16 which I saw by the river Chobar.             And when the cheru-
             bims marched on, the wheels ran and kept close to them;
              and when the cherubims lifted up their wings and were borne
              aloft from the earth, their wheels altered not their position.
          17 When those stood these stood; and when those mounted up
                 * Here also some words seem to be wanting, which pointed out
             hiin who sat on the throne.
                                   EZEKIEL.
    Ch. XL
        these mounted up with them, for there was a breath of life in
    18 them.    Then the glory of the Lord went out from the house
    19 and mounted up upon the cherubims ; and! the cherubims rais-
        ed their wings and mounted up from the earth in my sight.
        When they went out the wheels were close by them.                 And
        they stopped at the vestibule of the gate of the house of the
        Lord which was over against the house and the glory of the
    20 God of Israel was above over them.         This was the living being
        which I saw under the God of Israel at the river Chobar, and
    21 I knew that it was the cherubims.         Every one had four faces,
        and every one had eight wings, and the likeness of mens'
    22 hands under their wings.      And as for the likeness of their faces,
        these were the same faces which I saw under the glory of the
        God of Israel at the river Chobar and they marched every one
    XL       straight   forward.    Then a blast of wind took me up
        and brought me to the gate of the house of the Lord which
        was directly in front and which faced the east.       And behold at
        the vestibule of the gate about five and twenty men ! And I saw
        in the midst of them Jechonias the son of Ezer and Phaltias the
      2 son of Banaias, the leaders of the people.       And the Lord said
        to me, son of man, these are the men who devise vanities and
        who give bad advice in the city, Who say, Are not the houses
      3 lately rebuilt ?    This is the cauldron, but we are the flesh.
      4 Therefore    prophesy against     them.   Prophesy, Son     of   man.
      5 Thereupon the spirit of the Lord fell upon me, and said to me,
        Say, Thus saith the Lord, Thus have you spoken,              house of
        Israel, for I know the counsels of your mind : you have mul-
      6 tiplied your dead in this city, and filled the highways with the
      7 slain : therefore thus saith the Lord, your dead men whom you
        have slain in the midst of it, they are the flesh and it is the
        cauldron.    As for you I will drag you out of the midst of it.
        You are afraid of the sword, therefore I will bring a sword
      9 against you, saith the Lord, and drag you out of the midst of
        it and deliver you into the hands of strangers and execute judg-
     10 ment upon you.      By the sword you shall fall.    On the mountain
        of Israel I will judge you ; and you shall know that I am the
        Lord.
     13     And it came to pass while I was prophesying that Phal-
        tias the son of Banaias died, whereupon I fell on my face and
            VOL. II.                      3 z
            XTT.                  EZEKIEL.
        Ch.
           cried with a loud voice and said, Alas ! Alas ! O Lord, art thou
        14 making an utter end of the remnant of Israel ?Upon which a
        15 word of the Lord came to me, saying, Son of man, an end was
           put to thy brethren and to the men of thy captivity and to all
           the house of Israel, to whom the inhabitants of Jerusalem said,
        16 Away with you far from the Lord : to us this land is given for
           an inheritance.  Therefore say, Thus saith the Lord, I will
           drive these away to the nations and scatter them to every land.
           But I will be to those a little sanctuary in all the countries to
        17 which they have come.    Therefore say, Thus saith the Lord,
           I will take those in from among the nations and collect them
        18 from the countries in which I have dispersed them and
           give them the land of Israel and they shall come hither and re-
           move all its abominations and all its iniquities out of it ; and I
        19 will give them another heart and put a new spirit in them ; and
           I will take away the stony heart out of their flesh and give
           them a heart of flesh that they may walk in my statutes and
        20 keep my judgments and execute them.   And they shall be my
        21 people and I will be their God.But as the heart of these was
           entirely devoted to their abominations and their iniquities, I
           have requited their ways upon their heads, saith the Lord-
        22 Then the cherubims raised their wings and the wheels were
           close by them and the glory of the God of Israel was above
        23 over them.  And the glory of the Lord ascended up out of the
           midst of the city and halted on the mountain which was over
        21 against the city.And a blast of wind took me up and brought
           me to the land of the Chaldeans, to the captivity, in a vision, by
           the spirit of God.  And I went up on account of the vision
           which I saw and spoke to all the captivity all the things which
           the Lord had shewn me.
        XII.     V.  AGAIN a word of the Lord came to me, saying,
         2 Son of man, thou dwellest in the midst of these unrighteous
           men, who have eyes to see but do not see ; and have ears to
         3 hear, but do not hear.Because they are a rebellious house, do
           thou therefore, son of man, provide thyself utensils for a day
           of captivity, in their sight.And thou shalt be carried captive
           from this place of thine to another place, in their sight, that they
             —                                                        —
     Ch. XII.                    EZEKIEL.
      4 may see.    Because they are a rebellious house, therefore thou
         shalt carry out thy utensils, the utensils for a day of captivity,
         before their eyes.And thou shalt go out in the evening in their
      5 sight, as a captive goeth out.  Make for thyself a breach in the
      6 wall and thou shalt go out through that, in their sight.   Thou
         shalt be taken up upon shoulders and shalt go out in a secret
         manner.   Thou shalt cover thy face and not see the ground,
         for I have made thee a sign for the house of Israel.
      7     So when I had done according to all that he had com-
        manded me; and had carried out utensils for a day of cap-
        tivity, and made in the evening a breach for myself in the
         wall, and had gone out in a concealed manner, being taken
      8 up upon shoulders in their sight ; a word of the Lord came
      9 to me in the morning, saying, Son of man, Did not the house
        of Israel, that rebellious house, say to thee, What art thou
     10 doing ?   Say respecting them, Thus saith the Lord, Lord
        ^Yith respect to him who is the chief, and the ruler in Jeru-
        salem, even to all the house of Israel, who are among them
     11 say, I am acting signs.   As I have done, so shall it be with
     12 them.   They shall go into banishment and captivity.    And the
        chief in the midst of them shall be carried upon shoulders.
        He will go out in a secret manner through the wall ; and a
        breach will be made for him to go out through it.       He will
        cover his face that he may not be seen and he himself shall
     13 not see the ground.   But I will spread my net over him and
        he shall be caught in my enclosure.    And I will bring him to
        Babylon, to the land of the Chaldeans ; but he shall not see
     14 it and he shall die there. And all his helpers about him, and
        all them who assist him, I will scatter to every wind and make
     15 bare a sword to pursue them : and they shall know that I am
        the Lord, when I have dispersed them among the nations.
     16 For I will disperse them through the countries and leave a
        few of them from the sword, and from famine, and from pes-
        tilence, that they may declare all their iniquities among the
        nations whither they go.   And they shall know that I am the
        Lord.
    17     Again a word of the Lord came to me, saying, Son of man,
    18 thou shalt eat thy bread with sorrow and drink water with
    19 tribulation and affliction, and thou shalt say respecting the
                                                                                                                               ;
             Cb. XIII.                                       EZEKIEL.
                   people of that land, Thus saith the Lord to the inhabitants of
                   Jerusalem in the land of Israel, They shall eat their loaves
                   with scantiness, and drink water with astonishment, that the
                   land may be wasted with the fulness thereof; for all its inhabi-
             20 tants are in a course of impiety ; and their cities which are
                   inhabited shall be laid waste and the land shall be a desolation
                   and ye shall know that I am the Lord.
             21          Again a word of the Lord came to me saying, Son of man,
             22 what proverb is this which you have concerning Israel, say-
             23 ing, The days are far off.                            Vision is lost.              Therefore say to
                   them, Thus saith the Lord, I will change this parable ; and
                   the house of Israel shall no more use it ; for thou shalt say to
             24 them, The days are at hand and the word of every vision.                                                  For
                   there shall no more be a false vision of 'any sort, or a flattering
             25 diviner among the children of Israel ; for I the Lord will
                   speak my words—I will speak and perform, and no more put
                   off to a distant time ; for in these your days,                                              rebellious
                   house, I will speak a word and perform it, saith the Lord.
             26          Again a word of the Lord came to me, saying, Son of
             27 man, behold the house of Israel, that rebellious house, speak
                   saying, The vision which this man seeth is for many days
             28 and for times far distant he prophesieth; therefore say unto
                   them, Thus saith the Lord, None of my words which I speak
                   shall any more be prolonged. I will speak and I will perform
                   saith the Lord.
             XIII.             VI.       AGAIN a word of the Lord came to me saying,
               2 Son of man, prophesy against the prophets of Israel and thou
                3 shalt prophesy and say to them, Hear a word of the Lord,
                    Thus saith the Lord, Woe to the prophets who prophesy from
                4 their own hearts and see nothing.                                   Like foxes among ruins
                5 thy prophets,                   Israel, stood not for strength.                         When flocks
                    were collected against the house of Israel, they who say, "In
                6 the day of the Lord," stood not up.                                     They are seers of lies
                    they are prophesiers of vanities—they say, The Lord saith,
                    Though the Lord did not send them : and in 'order to confirm
                7 a word they began with, " Have you not seen a false vision
                8 and spoken false prophesies," now therefore say, Thus saith
                    the Lord, Because your words are false and your prophe-
                                                                                                                          ;;
       Ch. XIII.                                       EZEKIEL.
             sies vain ; therefore behold I am against you, saith the Lord
         9 And I will stretch forth my hand against these prophets, who
             see falsehoods and prophesy vanities : they shall not be in the
             school of my people nor enrolled in the enrollment of the house
             of Israel ; nor shall they enter into the land of Israel and they
       10 shall know that I am the Lord.                              Because they have led my peo-
             ple astray, saying " Peace " when there was no peace.                                                  And
       11 when one buildeth a wall they anoint it ; it shall fall.                                              Say to
             these anointers, It shall fall.                      For there shall be an overwhelm-
             ing rain, and I will send hail stones against their buttresses ;
             and they shall fall ; and a tempestuous wind ; and it shall be bro-
       12 ken down.                Now when the wall is fallen, will they not say to
             you, " Where is the anointing with which you anointed it ? "
       13 Therefore thus saith the Lord, I will cause a furious tempest
             to break it down ; and there shall be an overwhelming rain in
             mine anger ; And I will bring the hail stones against it with fury
       14 for destruction ; and demolish the wall which you anointed
            and it shall fall : and lay it flat on the ground and its foundations
            shall be discovered; and when it shall fall, you shall be consum-
             ed with rebukes ; and you shall know that I am the Lord.
       15 When I accomplish my wrath on the wall, and on them who
             anoint it ; it shall fall.               I have indeed said to you, the wall is no
       16 more, nor do they exist who anointed it, namely, the prophets
             of    Israel who prophesy concerning Jerusalem and who see
             peace for her when there is no peace, saith the Lord.
       17          Now as for thee son of man set thy face also against the
             daughters of thy people who prophesy from their own heart;
             and prophesy against them and say,
       18          Thus saith the Lord, Woe to those women who sew pil-
             lows under every elbow ; and make coverings for every head of
             every age, to lead souls astray.                           The souls of my people have
       19 been turned out of the way.                             They have indeed inveigled souls
             and profaned me to my people, for a handful of barley and
             for pieces of bread, to kill souls which should not die ; and to
             preserve souls alive which ought not to live, by your oracling
       20 to the people who hearken to vain oracles.                                     Therefore thus saith
             the Lord, Lord, Behold I am against your pillows on which
             you whirl souls about ; and I will tear them from your arms and
             dismiss the souls—those souls which you are whirling about
                                  EZEKIEL.
        Ch. XIV.
        21 for dispersion : and I will tear in pieces your coverings and de-
           liver my people out of your hand, and they shall no more be
           in your hands to be whirled about. And ye shall know that I
        22 am the Lord.  Because you turned aside the heart of the righte-
           ous, whom I turned not aside, in order that you might strength-
           en the hands of a transgressor that he should by no means
        23 turn from his evil way and live ; therefore you shall no more
           see falsities, nor shall you any more utter divinations ; for I will
           deliver my people out of your hand and you shall know that I
           am the Lord.
        XIV.     VII.   WHEN some of the elders, principal men of the
           people of Israel, had come to me and were sitting before me a
            word of the Lord came to me, saying,
         3     Son of man, these men have given their imaginations the
            rule over their hearts, though they placed before their eyes the
            punishment of their transgressions.Shall I, being consulted?
         4 return them an answer ?   Therefore speak to them, and thou
            shalt say to them, Thus saith the Lord, Be the man who he
            may of the house of Israel, who giveth his imagination the
            rule over his understanding, when he hath set before his eyes the
           punishment of his iniquity, and cometh to a prophet : I the Lord
            will answer him by the things with which his mind is entangled,
         5 that he may lead the house of Israel astray, according to their
           hearts which are alienated from me by their desires, Say there-
         6 fore to the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord, Lord, reform
           and turn from your evil devices, and from all your acts of im-
         7 piety ; and turn your faces about.For be the man who he may
            of the house of Israel, or of the proselytes who have sojourned
           with Israel, who shall separate himself from me, and give his
           desires the rule over his understanding when he hath set be-
           fore his eyes the punishment of his iniquity and shall come to the
           prophet that he may inquire of me ; I the Lord will answer him
         8 by that with which he is entangled ; and I will set my face
           against that man, and give him up to desolation and de-
           struction ; and remove him from among my people ; and ye
         9 shall know that I am the Lord.  Andwith respect to that pro-
           phet when he shall have wandered and spoken ; I the Lord
           have caused that prophet to wander, and I will stretch out my
                                                                                                                                                    ;
                XIY.                                              EZEKIEL.
       Ch.
              hand against him and destroy him from among my people Is-
       10 rael.             And they shall bear their iniquity ; the inquirer according
              to his guilt, and in like manner the prophet according to his
       11 guilt, that the house of Israel may no more be led astray from
              me, and that they may no more be polluted with their trans-
              gressions : so they shall be my people and I will be their God,
              saith the Lord.
       12             Again a word of the Lord came to me saying, Son of man,
        13 when a country transgresseth against me, so as to incur ruin
              and I stretch out my hand against it ; and break the staff of
              bread, and send against it famine, and destroy out of it both
        11 man and beast ; should there be in it three such men as these
               Noe, Daniel and Job : They for their righteousness shall be
       15 saved, saith the Lord.                                   Or if I send wild beasts against that
               land and punish it, and it become a desolation not to be travel-
        US led by reason of the wild beasts ; and there be in it three such
               as those ; As I live, saith the Lord neither sons nor daughters
               shall be saved ; none but they only shall escape, and the land
        17 shall be for destruction.                                   Or if I bring a sword against that
               land, and say, sword, pass thou through this land, that I may
        18 cut off from it man and beast ; should there be in it three such
               men as those ; As I live saith the Lord, they shall not deliver
        19 sons nor daughters ; they and they only shall be saved.                                                                     Or if I
               send a pestilence against that land, and pour out my wrath up-
               on it with slaughter, with intent to destroy out of it man and
        20 beast, and Noe, Daniel and Job be therein ; As I live, saith the
               Lord, neither sons nor daughters shall be left : they for their
        21 righteousness shall deliver only their own souls.                                                                      Yet thus
               saith the Lord, Though I send these my four severe judgments
               sword and famine and wild beasts and pestilence, against Jeru-
        22 salem to destroy out of it man and beast, still, behold some are
               left in it, the saved of it, who are leading out of it sons and daugh-
               ters ; behold they are coming out to you and you shall see their
               ways and their desires, and be sorry for the evils which they
                have brought on Jerusalem—for all the evils which they have
        23 brought upon it.                             And they will comfort you, for you will see
                their ways and their desires ; and you will know that I have not
                without cause done all those things which I have done to it,
                saith the Lord.
          Ch. XY. XVI.                  EZEKIEL.
          XV.      VIII.    AGAIN a word of the Lord came to me, say-
           2 ing, Son of man, Why should the wood of the grape vine be
             distinguished from the wood of all the branchy trees which are
           3 among the trees of the forest ?     Can men use the wood of it for
             any kind of workmanship ?      Can they make a pin of it to hang
           4 thereon any utensil ?    Is it not in a peculiar manner doomed to
             be consumed by fire ?     Every year the fire consumeth what is
             lopped from it.   And if a bit of it is left, is it fit for any kind of
           5 workmanship ?       Even when entire it will be unfit for any
             work : how then, when fire hath burned it to a brand, can it
           6 serve for any work ?       Say therefore, Thus saith the Lord,
             Like the wood of the vine among the trees of the forest,
             which I have doomed to be destroyed by fire, so have I
           7 doomed the inhabitants of Jerusalem.        And I will set my face
             against them.    When they escape out of one fire another shall
             devour them.     And they shall know that I am the Lord, when
           8 I set my face against them.     And I will make the land a deso-
             lation for their apostacy, saith the Lord.
         XVI. Then a word of the Lord came to me, saying, Son of man
           3 testify against Jerusalem her iniquities, and thou shalt say,
             Thus saith the Lord to Jerusalem, Thy root and thy pedigree
             is from the land of Chanaan.       Thy father was an Amorite and
           4 thy mother a Chettite, and this is the history of thy birth—on
             the day thou wast born thy navel was not tied nor wert thou
             washed with water nor sprinkled with salt ; nor wert thou
           5 wrapped up in swaddling bands.          But mine eye which was
             over thee did not spare to do for thee all these things—to
             compassionate thee.     When thou wast cast out into the open
           6 field for thine ill shape, on the day thou wast born ; I passed
             by thee and saw thee polluted with thy blood and said to thee,
           7 From thy blood there is life.     Be multiplied like the grass of
             the field ; I have betrothed thee.    So thou didst increase and
             grow great and enter the class of chief cities.         Thy breasts
             were fashioned and thy locks flowing.        But thou wast naked
          8 and exposed to shame.        Then I passed by thee and beheld
             thee and lo ! thou wast of a marriageable age.      So I spread my
             skirt over thee and covered thy nakedness ; and sware to thee
          9 and entered into covenant with thee, saith the Lord.             And
             when thou becamest mine I washed thee with water, and
      4
     Ch. XVI.                      EZEKIEL.
        cleansed away thy blood from thee and anointed thee with oil ;
     10 And I clothed thee with embroidery and shod thee with pur-
        ple sandals and girded thee with a cotton zone and threw
     11 around thee a mantle of tissue.       And I decked thee with orna-
        ments, and put bracelets round thy wrists and a chain round
     12 thy neck, and gave thee a jewel for thy nose and ear-rings for
     13 thine ears, and a crown of exquisite beauty for thy head.            So
        thou wast adorned with gold and silver, and thy raiment was
        of cotton, tissue and embroidery ; and thy food was fine flour,
     1  oil and honey.    And thou becamest exceeding beautiful, and thy
        fame spread among the nations for thy beauty.          Because it was
        perfect by reason of the comeliness and the elegance with
     15 which I adorned thee, saith the Lord; thou wast vain of thy
         beauty and became a harlot because of thy renown : and didst
     16 pour out thy fornications upon every passenger.             Nay thou
        didst take some of thy garments and make for thyself idols of
        needle work ; and didst commit gross fornication on them.
        Though thou shouldst not have gone in; nor should such a
     17 thing be done, thou didst take the vessels, which were thy
        boast, made of my gold and of my silver, some of those which
        I gave thee ; and didst make for thyself male images and com-
     18 mit fornication with them.        Thou didst take also thine em-
        broidered raiment and clothe them and didst set mine oil and
     19 mine incense before them.        My bread also which I gave thee
        —the fine flour, oil and honey with which. I fed thee, these
     20 thou didst set before them for a sweet smelling savour.        Nay, it
        came to pass, saith the Lord, That thou didst take thy sons
        and thy daughters whom thou hadst born and didst sacrifice
    21 these to them to be devoured.       As if it had been a small matter
        to commit fornication, thou didst slay thy children and offer
        them up, making them expiatory sacrifices to those images,
    22 (this exceeded all thy fornication) and didst not remember thy
        youth when thou wast naked and bare, when though polluted
    23 with thy blood thou didst live.       Nay after all these acts of ini-
     24 quity, saith the Lord, thou didst moreover build for thyself a
        brothel ; and erect for thyself a place of prostitution in every
     25 street ; at the head of every street thou didst build thy brothels,
        and sacrifice thy beauty and prostitute thyself to every comer,
     26 and multiply thine acts of whoredom.         When thou hadst com-
            vol. ii.                   4 A
                                 EZEKIEL.
       Ch. XVI.
          mitted fornication with the Egyptians thy neighbours and lust-
          ful paramours ; and hadst done this frequently to provoke me
       27 to wrath, though I stretched forth my hand against thee, and
          deprived thee of thy dues and delivered thee up to them who
          hate thee—to the daughters of the Philistines, who turned thee
       28 out of that way in which thou wast committing iniquity ; yet
          thou wentest a whoring among the daughters of Assur; and
           even thus wast not satisfied.So having committed whoredom
       29 and not being satiated thou didst multiply thy covenants with
           the land of the Chaldees and even with these thou wast not
       30 satisfied.How can I dispose of thy daughter? saith the Lord
           seeing thou hast committed all these acts of an abandoned wo-
          man?     And hast trebled thy fornication by thy daughters ?
       31 Having built a brothel at the head of every way, and erected
          a place of prostitution in every street, wast thou like a harlot
       32 collecting hire ?Was there ever an adulterous woman like thee
          receiving gifts from her husband and giving rewards to her
       33 gallants ? For thou hast given rewards to all thy lovers, and
       34 loaded them with gifts to come to thee from all around.  So
           there was in thee a depravity beyond other women, both in
           thy whoredom and with regard to them who committed lewd-
           ness with thee.Thy giving gifts and no rewards being given
       35 thee are evidences of thy depravity.Therefore, hear  harlot,
       36 a word of the Lord, thus saith the Lord, Because thou hast
          squandered thy money, therefore thy scandalous fornication
           shall be exposed before thy lovers ; but for all thy wicked de-
       37 sires and for the blood of thy children whom thou hast sacri-
           ficed to them—for this behold I will assemble all thy lovers
           with whom thou hast had connexion, both all whom thou hast
           loved and all whom thou hatedst, and I will gather against thee
           them from all around ; and lay open thy wickedness before
       38 them, that they may see all thy shame.And I will punish thee
           with the punishment of an adulteress, and involve thee in the
        39 blood of wrath and jealousy ; and deliver thee up into their
           hands. And they shall demolish thy brothel, and pull down
           thy place of prostitution, and strip thee of thy clothing and
           seize thy fair jewels ; and when they shall have left thee naked
        40 and exposed to shame, then crowds shall be brought against
           thee, who shall stone thee with stones and hack thee with their
     Ch. XVI.                  EZEKIEL.
    41 swords ; and they shall burn thy houses with fire, and execute
        vengeance on thee in the sight of many women.     So will I
    42 turn thee from whoredom and no more give thee gifts.   Then
        I will cause my wrath against thee to abate, and my jealousy
        shall be removed from thee, and I will be quiet and no more
    43 care for thee.  Because thou hast not remembered thy youth
        and hast grieved me with all these things ; therefore behold I
        have requited thy ways -on thy head, saith the Lord.  Thou
    44 indeed hast so added impiety to all thy transgressions that all
        these things have occasioned the parable which people use
        against thee, saying, "As was the mother so is the daughter."
    45 Thou art indeed a very daughter of thy mother who aban-
        doned her husband and her children: and the sisters of thy
        brothers are they who abandoned their husbands and their
        children. Your mother was a Chettite and your father an
    46 Amorite, your eldest sister is Samaria—she and her daughters
        who live on thy left ; and your youngest sister who liveth on
    47 thy right is Sodom with her daughters.    But thou hast not
        walked even in their ways, nor done according to their trans-
        gressions in a small degree.Thou hast surpassed them in all
    48 thy ways.   As I live, saith the Lord, Sodom herself and her
        daughters did not do as thou and thy daughters have done.
    49 But this was the      iniquity of  thy sister Sodom—Pride.
        Through fulness of bread and prosperity she and her daugh-
        ters grew wanton. There was this also in her and her daugh-
    50 ters that they did not assist the distressed and the needy ; but
        were haughty and committed iniquities in my sight ; therefore
    51 I destroyed them.   In my view Samaria also did not commit
        half thy crimes. Thou indeed hast multiplied thine iniquities
        more than they, and justified thy sisters by all thine iniqui-
    52 ties which thou hast committed. Thou therefore shalt bear thy
        punishment.  Inasmuch as thou hast corrupted thy sisters by
        thy sins, which thou hast committed in a more aggravated de-
        gree than they, and made them righteous in comparison of
        thee ; be thou therefore confounded and bear thy dishonour,
    53 for having justified thy sisters.When I turn back their apos-
       tacies—the apostacy of Sodom and her daughters, and turn
       back the apostacy of Samaria and her daughters, I will turn
    54 back also thine apostacy in the midst of them ; that thou mayst
         Ch. XVII.                    EZEKIEL.
             bear thy punishment and be dishonoured for all that thou hast
         55 done to provoke me to anger.        Aud when thy sister Sodom
             and her daughters shall be restored to their former state then
             thou and thy daughters shall be restored to your former state.
         56 Now was not thy sister Sodom a by word in thy mouth in the
         57 days of thy pride, before thy wickedness was discovered ; in
            the same manner as thou art now the scoff of the daughters of
            Syria and of all around her and of all the daughters of the
         58 foreign tribes around thee ?     Thou hast borne thy wickedness
         59 and thy transgressions, saith the Lord.      Thus saith the Lord,
            I will deal with thee as thou hast done.     As thou hast slighted
         60 these things that thou mightest transgress my covenant, when
            I remember my covenant made with thee in the days of thy
        61 youth and re-establish for thee an everlasting covenant; then
            thou wilt recollect thy way and be ashamed, when thou hast
            again received thy sisters—the elder and the younger.        For I
            will give them to thee to be part of thy family, but not by thy
        62 covenant.    And I will establish my covenant with thee ; and
        63 thou shalt know that I am the Lord, that thou mayst remem-
            ber and be ashamed, and never more be able to open thy
            mouth, because of thy confusion when I make a complete atone-
            ment for thee according to all that thou hast done, saith the
            Lord.
        XVII.       IX.   AGAIN a word of the Lord came to me, saying,
            Son of man, relate a fable and speak a parable to the house
         3 of Israel and thou shalt say, Thus saith the Lord, There was
            a great eagle with large wings, rapid in its motion and com-
            pletely furnished with talons : and it winged its way to Liba-
         4 nus, and took hold of its choicest cedar; and cropped the
            tops of the tender branch and brought them to the land of
         5 Chanaan, and in a walled city they were deposited.        Then he
            took a seedling of the land, and planted it in a field by much
         6 water, and ordered it to be taken care of.      And it sprang up
            and became a vine weak and small, so that its branches could
            be seen only by them near it.    But it had roots underneath it,
            so it grew to be a vine, and put forth shoots and extended
           its tendrils.
         7     And there was another eagle with large wings and many
                                                                     ——
   Ch. XVII.                   EZEKIEL.
      talons : and lo ! this vine warped towards hiin, and its roots
      were towards him and it shot out its branches for him, that
      he might water it together with the shoot of its own planting,
    8 which being in a good soil by much water grew luxuriantly,
      so as to blossom and bear fruit, and become a great vine.
    9 Therefore say, Thus saith the Lord, Shall it prosper?       Shall
      not the roots of this tender shoot and its fruit be blasted?
      Yes ; all its former shoots shall wither ; so that it will not re-
      quire a strong arm nor much people to pull it up by its roots.
       Though behold it is luxuriant, shall it prosper—shall it not
      wither at the first touch of a blasting wind?     Both it and its
      sprouting shoot shall be withered.
   11     Moreover a word of the Lord came to me, saying, Son of
       man say now to this rebellious house, Do you not know the
   12 meaning of this?    Say, When the king of Babylon hath come
       to Jerusalem, and shall take the king thereof and the chiefs
       thereof, and hath caused them to be brought to him to Baby-
   13 Ion ; and shall take one of the royal seed and make a covenant
      with him, and shall lay him under an oath and comprehend
   14 the generals of the land, that it shall be a weak kingdom and
      never be independent—that he will keep this covenant with
   15 him and that it shall stand.    Now should he revolt from him
      so as to send his ambassadors to Egypt, that it may furnish
      him with horses and a great army, shall he prosper ?        Shall
       he who is perfidious escape ?    And shall he who breaketh a
   16 covenant be delivered ?   As I live saith the Lord, in the place
      where the king liveth, who made him king; even with him
       in Babylon shall he die who hath dishonoured my oath and
   17 broken my covenant : and neither with a great army nor with
       much people, shall Pharao support him in the war, when ram-
       parts are a raising, and towers a building to destroy lives.
   18 As he hath dishonoured an oath, by breaking a covenant,
       (when lo ! he had given his hand) and hath done all these
   19 things to him, he shall not escape.     Therefore say, As I live
      saith the Lord, The oath which he hath dishonoured, and
      the covenant which he hath broken, even this I will requite
   20 upon his head.   And I will spread my net for him and he shall
   21 be taken in my enclosure.    In every engagement his men shall
       fall by the sword ; and them who are left I will scatter to
                                                                           —
          Ch. XVIII.                  EZEKIEL.
              every wind ; and you shall know that I the Lord have spoken.
          22 For thus saith the Lord,
                 I will myself take one of the choicest cedars from a sum-
             mit; (their hearts I will nip) and I will plant it on a lofty
          23 mountain ; I will cause it to be suspended on a lofty moun-
             tain of Israel ; and I will plant it, and it shall blossom and bear
             fruit, and become a great cedar ; and under it shall rest every
             bird, even all the winged tribe shall repose in its shade : its
          24 branches shall be renewed : and all the trees of the plain shall
             know that I am the Lord who bringeth down the lofty tree,
             and exalteth the tree which is low, and who causeth the green
             tree to wither, and the withered tree to flourish.   I the Lord
             have spoken and I will perform.
          XVIII.      X.   AGAIN a word of the Lord came to me, say-
             ing, Son of man why have you this proverb among the chil-
             dren of Israel, saying, "The fathers have eaten a sour grape
           3 and the childrens' teeth are set on edge."       As I live saith
             the Lord, This parable shall no more be used by Israel, for
           4 all souls are mine.  As the soul of the father so also the soul
           5 of the son is mine.    The soul that sinneth it shall die.   But
             the man who shall be just, who executeth judgment and jus-
           6 tice, who eateth not upon the mountains, nor lifteth up his
              eyes to the desires of the house of Israel, and defileth not his
             neighbour's wife, nor approacheth a woman in a state of sepa-
           7 ration ; who shall oppress no man ; shall restore the pledge
              of a debtor and not be guilty of rapine; who shall deal out
           8 his bread to the hungry, and clothe the naked, and not lend
             his money on interest, nor take usury, and shall turn away
             his hand from injustice, and execute righteous judgment be-
           9 tween man and man, and hath walked in my statutes, and
             kept my judgments to do them.        Such a one is righteous.
              He shall live, saith the Lord.
          10     But if he beget a profligate son, a shedder of blood and
          11 one who committeth sins, who hath not walked in the way of
              his righteous father but hath eaten on the mountains and de-
          12 filed his neighbour's wife ; hath oppressed the poor and needy,
              and been guilty of rapine ; hath not restored a pledge and hath
          13 lifted up his eyes to the idols ; hath done justice, lent on in-
                                                                                                                      ;
                                                   EZEKIEL.
  Ok. XVIII.
        terest and taken usury.                    He shall not live.                He bath committed
        all these iniquities.                He shall surely die.                    His blood shall be
   14 upon him.               But if he beget a son who hath seen all the sins
        which his father committed and hath been struck with awe
   15 and not done the like—hath not eaten upon the mountains,
         nor fixed his eyes on the desires of the house of Israel ; nor de-
         filed his neighbour's wife, nor oppressed any man, nor taken a
         pledge; nor been guilty of rapine—hath dealt out his bread to
   17 the hungry and clothed the naked, and turned away his hand
         from injustice ; hath neither lent on interest nor taken usury
   18 hath practised justice and walked in my statutes ; he shall
         not die for the iniquities of his father.                              He shall live.             But as
         for his father, if he be guilty of rapine and oppression, he
         hath done wrong in the midst of my people, and for his iniqui-
   19 ties he shall die.                  Now should you say, Why hath not the son
         borne the iniquity of his father ?                          Because the son hath practis-
         ed justice and mercy ; hath kept all my statutes and done them,
   20 he shall live.                But the soul which sinneth shall die.                                The son
          shall not bear the iniquity of his father ; nor shall the father
         bear the iniquity of the son.                         The righteousness of the righte-
         ous shall be upon himself, and upon the iniquitous shall be his
    21 iniquity.            But if the unrighteous man will turn from all the un-
          righteous acts which he hath done, and will keep all my com-
          mandments, and practise righteousness and mercy ; he shall
    22 surely live and not die.                        None of the transgressions which he
          committed shall be remembered; for the righteousness which
    23 he hath exercised, he shall live.                                Can I (saith the Lord) so
          much desire the death of the unrighteous, as I do that he
    24 should turn from his evil way and live ?                                    But when a righteous
          man turneth away from his righteousness, and committeth ini-
          quity according to all the iniquities which the wicked hath
          done, none of the righteous acts which he hath done shall be
          remembered.              For the sins which he hath committed, even for
    25 these he shall die.                   Yet you have said, The way of the Lord is
           not straight.            Hear now, all ye house of Israel, Is not my way
     26 straight ?            Is it not your way which is not straight ?                               When the
           righteous turneth from his righteousness and committeth a crime,
           for the crime he committeth he should die—for it he shall
     27 die.          And when a wicked man turneth from his wickedness
           which he committed, and shall practise justice and righteous-
               XIX.                      EZEKIEL.
          Ch.
          28 ness ; lie hath saved his soul.    He hath turned away from all his
              wicked acts which he committed ; he shall surely live ; he shall
          29 not die.    Yet the house of Israel say, The way of the Lord is
              not straight.  Is not my way straight,       house of Israel ?   Is it
          30 not your way which is not straight?       I will judge you, saith the
              Lord,     house of Israel, every one according to his way.         Be
              converted and turn from all your acts of wickedness, and they
          31 shall not bring upon you the punishment of iniquity. Cast away
              from you all your impious acts ; which you have impiously com-
              mitted against me; and make yourselves a new heart and a
              new spirit : now why do you die,        house of Israel, since I de-
              sire not the death of him who dieth ? saith the Lord.
          XIX.       Now take thou up a lamentation for the prince of Israel
           2 and thou shalt say, What was thy mother ?           She was a lioness
              among lions.    In the midst of lions she multiplied her young.
           3 And one of her young lions sallied forth ; he became a lion and
           4 learned to prowl.     He devoured men and the nations heard of
              him; in their trap he was taken and carried in a cage to the land
           5 of Egypt.     When she saw that her main support was removed
              from her, was lost ; she took another of her young lions and
           6 made him lion.      And he roamed about among lions.           He be-
           7 came a lion and learned to seize prey.         He devoured men and
              prowled with fierceness, and made their cities a desolation and
              laid waste the land, and the fulness thereof by the sound of his
           8 roaring.    Then the nations set upon him from the countries
              around : they spread their nets for him ; in their trap he was ta-
            9 ken.   So they chained him and in a cage he came to the king
              of Babylon, who put him in prison that his voice should not
          10 be heard on the mountains of Israel.         Thy mother was like a
              vine or a flowery pomegranate planted by water.          It was fruit-
          11 ful and full of buds by being plentifully watered.         And it be-
              came a sceptre for them who bear rule over tribes, and became
              distinguished for its greatness among other stocks, and was
          12 conscious of its greatness by the multitude of its branches.       But
              it is broken in wrath and thrown on the ground ; and a burn-
              ing wind hath blasted its choice branches.          Vengeance hath
              been taken on them : and the rod of its strength is withered ; a
           13 fire hath consumed it.    And now when they had planted it in a
           14 desert, in a land without water, a fire hath issued forth from a
              rod of her choice shoots, and consumed her and she hath no
    Ch. XX.                      EZEKIEL.
       more in her a sceptre of power.     The tribe is become a parable
       in the song of woe and shall be for a subject of lamentation.
    XX. X.        AND it came to pass in the seventh year, on the fifth
       month and tenth day of the month, that some of the elders of
       Israel came to inquire of the Lord, and while they were sitting
     3 before me a word of the Lord came to me, saying, Son of man
       speak to the elders of the house of Israel and thou shalt say to
       them, Thus saith the Lord, Are you come to inquire of me ?      As
     I I live, saith the Lord, I will not answer you ; I will not, son of
       man, with avengement avenge them.        Testify against them the
     5 iniquities of their fathers and thou shalt say to them, Thus
       saith the Lord, from the day I chose the house of Israel ; and
       was made known to the seed of the house of Jacob ; and acknow-
       ledged by them in the land of Egypt ; when I took hold of
     6 them with my hand, saying, I the Lord am your God,—on the
       very day when I took hold of them with my hand to bring them
       out of the land of Egypt into the land which I had prepared for
       them—a land flowing with milk and honey—it is the honey-
     7 comb of the whole earth; though I said to them let every one
       put away the abominations of his eyes and with the devices of
       Egypt be not polluted, I the Lord am your God; yet they
     8 apostatized from me and would not hearken to me.          They did
       not cast away the abominations of their eyes, nor did they ut-
       terly forsake the devices of Egypt ; therefore I spoke of pour-
        ing out my wrath on them—of spending mine indignation on
     9 them in the midst of Egypt : but that my name might not be
        altogether profaned in the sight of the nations among whom
        they were, I did in their sight [those miracles] by which I
        was made known to them, in order to bring them out of the
        land of Egypt.
    10     So I led them into the wilderness ; and gave them my sta-
    ll tutes and made known to them my rules of rectitude, which if
    12 a man practise he shall live thereby ; I gave them also my sab-
        baths, to be a sign between me and them; that they might
    13 know that I the Lord am their sanctifier.       And I said to the
        house of Israel in the wilderness, " Walk in my statutes," but
        they walked not.    They rejected my rules of rectitude, which
        if a man practise he shall live by them ; and they profaned my
           VOL. II.                  4 B
                                                                                                                                            :
                Ch. XX.                                              EZEKIEL.
                      sabbaths exceedingly : whereupon I spoke of pouring out my
                       wrath on them in the wilderness, to destroy them utterly
                14 ButIacted so that my name should not be altogether profaned in
                      the sight of the nations, before whose eyes I had brought them
                15 out : and I lifted up my hand against them in the wilderness thus
                      far—that I would not bring them into the land which I had
                      given them, (a land flowing with milk and honey : it is the ho-
                16 ney comb of the whole earth) because they had rejected my
                      rules of rectitude, and had not walked in my statutes; but
                      profaned my sabbaths, and had gone after the desires of their
                17 own heart.                But mine eye had compassion on them so as not to
                      blot them out entirely ; so I did not bring them to utter destruc-
                      tion in the wilderness.
                18           Then I said to their children in the wilderness, walk not ye
                      in the customs of your fathers, nor observe their rules of con-
                      duct ; have no communication with their devices and be not
                19 polluted.               I the Lord am your God ; walk in my statutes, and
                20 keep my rules of rectitude and practise them ; and hallow my
                      sabbaths and let them be a sign between me and you, that you
                21 acknowledge that I the Lord am your Grod.                                                    But even these
                      their children rebelled against me.                                 In my statutes they did not
                      walk, nor did they keep my rules of rectitude to practise them,
                      which if a man do he shall live by them ; and they profaned
                      my sabbaths ; therefore I spoke of pouring out my wrath upon
                      them in the wilderness—of accomplishing mine indignation
                22 upon them.                  But I acted so that my name should not be utterly
                      profaned in the sight of the nations.                                 As I had brought them out
                23 before their eyes, I lifted up my hand against them in the wil-
                      derness that I would scatter them among the nations and dis-
                24 perse them through the countries.                                       Because they did not prac-
                      tise my rules of rectitude, but rejected my statutes and profan-
                      ed my sabbaths, and their eyes were after the desires of their
                25 fathers ; therefore I gave them statutes not morally good, and
                       rules of conduct in which they could not entitle themselves to
                26 life by them, that I might by their own doctrinal notions pol-
                       lute them, when I passed through all their first born males in
                27 order to remove them out of sight.                                           Therefore, speak to the
                       house of Israel, son of man, and thou shalt say unto them,
                       Thus saith the Lord, thus far your fathers provoked me to
    Ch. XX.                   EZEKIEL.
       wrath, by their transgressions which they committed against
    28 me.  And when I brought them into the land, which I lifted
       up my hand to give them ; they beheld every high hill and eve-
       rv shady grove, and there they sacrificed to their gods ; and
       there set in order the sweet smelling savour ; and there pour-
    29 ed out their libations.And when I said to them, What is this
       Abama, that you go thither, they called its name Abama. which
    30 it retaineth to this day.Therefore say to the house of Israel,
       Thus saith the Lord if you are polluted with the iniquities of
       your fathers and you go a whoring after their abominations
    31 even with the first fruits of your gifts—with those dedications?
       with which yon are polluted by all your desires even to this
       day, shall I return you an answer,   house of Israel ? As I
    32 live, saith the Lord, I will not answer you.And though this
       should come into your mind it shall not be as you say, " We
       will be like the nations and like the tribes of the earth in wor-
    33 shipping stocks and stones."  For as I live, saith the Lord,
       With a strong hand and an uplifted arm, and with an out pour-
    31 ed wrath I will reign over you.  And I will bring you out
       from among the peoples and gather you from the countries
       where you have been scattered with a strong hand and an up-
    35 lifted arm and with out poured wrath.  And I will bring you
       into the wilderness of the tribes and there plead with you face
    36 to face. As I pleaded with your fathers in the wilderness of
       the land of Egypt, so will I plead with you, saith the Lord.
    37 And I will make you pass under my rod and bring you in by
    38 number, and select from among you the wicked and the apos-
       tates ; (for out of their captivity I will bring even these, but in-
       to the land of Israel they shall not come) and you shall know
       that I am the Lord, Lord.
    39    Now as for you,    house of Israel ; Thus saith the Lord,
       put away every one his devices, and after that if you will hear-
       ken to me, and no more profane my holy name with your gifts
    40 and your devices, (for on my holy mountain, on my lofty
       mountain, saith the Lord, there all the house of Israel shall
       serve me at last ; and there I will expect and there I will accept
       your offerings—even the offerings of your dedications at all
   41 your solemnities) with the odour of sweet smelling incense I
       will accept you, when I have brought you out from among the
              XXI.                       EZEKTEL.
          Ch.
             peoples, and received you from the countries in which you
             have been dispersed, and I will be hallowed among you before
         42 the eyes of the peoples, and you shall know that I am the Lord,
             when I have brought you to the land of Israel, to the land for
         43 which I lifted up my hand to give it to your fathers ; and you
             will there remember your ways and your devices with which
             you have been polluted, and express contrition for all your
         44 acts of wickedness ; and acknowledge that I am the Lord,
             when I deal thus with you (that my name may not be profan-
             ed) according to your evil ways and according to your corrupt
             devices, saith the Lord.
         45      Then a word of the Lord came to me, saying, son of man,
          46 set thy face against Thaiman and look towards Daram and pro-
             phesy against the forest at the head of Nageb, and thou shalt
             say to the forest of JSTageb, hear a word of the Lord, Thus
             saith the Lord, Lord, behold I am kindling a fire in thee, and
             it shall devour in thee every green tree and every dry tree ; and
             the flame which is kindled shall not be extinguished ; and by
             it the whole surface from south to north shall be burned up.
          48 And all flesh shall know that I the Lord have kindled it.             It
              shall not be extinguished.
          XXI.       And when I said, "0 Lord, Lord, forbid" they said to
              me, Is not this a parable which is spoken ?       Whereupon a word
              of the Lord came to me saying, Therefore prophesy, son of
           2 man, set thy face against Jerusalem, and look towards their
              holy things, and thou shalt prophesy against the land of Israel
           3 and thou shalt say to the land of Israel, Thus saith the Lord, be-
              hold I am against thee and I will draw my sword out of its
           4 sheath, and root out of thee the lawless and unjust.         Because I
              will root out of thee the lawless and unjust ; therefore my sword
              shall come forth out of its sheath against all flesh from south
           5 to north.    And all flesh shall know, that I the Lord have drawn
           6 mysword out of its sheath. It shall not return any more. There-
              fore, son of man, heave thou convulsive groans, and sigh sor-
           7 rowfully before their eyes.      And if they say to thee, Why art
              thou groaning ?     Then thou shalt say, Because of the news : for
              it is coming : and every heart shall be broken, and all hands en-
              feebled ; and all flesh and every spirit shall faint ; and all thighs
              shall be polluted with filth.      Behold it is coming! saith the
              Lord."
   Ch. XXL                   EZEKIEL.
    8     Then a word of the Lord came to me, saying, Son of
     9 man, prophesy and thou shalt say, Thus saith the Lord, Say,
    10    sword, sword be sharp, and full of fury that thou mayst
       slaughter ; be sharpened that thou mayst glisten ; being pre-
   11 pared for destruction slay; set at na*ught ; fell every tree.He
       hath now made it ready for his hand to grasp it.The sword is
       sharpened. It is ready to be put into the hand of the slayer.
   12 Scream, son of man, and raise the mournful cry ; for it is come
       among my people ; it is among all the leaders of Israel.They
      shall dwell near the sword.It is among my people. Therefore
       give it a clap of applause with thy hand.
   13     (p) Because its cause is just, what then ?Must the tribe
       be cast off?
   14     (J) That shall not be the case saith the Lord, Lord.But,
       thou son of man, prophesy and clap thy hands and redouble
       the sword. It is the third sword of the slain, the great sword
       of slaughter. Therefore thou shalt strike them with terror.
   15 See that thy heart be not broken, though the fainty be multi-
      plied at every gate. They are delivered up to the slaughter of
      the sword.  It is well made for slaughter.It is well made to
   16 glitter. Therefore pass through.Be sharp on the right and on
   17 the left ; which way soever thy face may be raised up.And as
      for me I will clap my hands and give a loose to my wrath. I
      the Lord have spoken.
   18     Then a word of the Lord came to me, saying, And thou
      son of man, Sketch out for thyself two ways, for the sword of
   19 the king of Babylon to enter. From one and the same coun-
      try let them both come ; and let there be a hand at the head of
      the way to the city.At the head of that way thou shalt set it
   20 up, for the sword to enter against Kabbath of the Ammonites,
      and against Judea and against Jerusalem in the midst of it.
   21 For the king of Babylon will halt on the old road—at the head
       of the two roads to consult an oracle, to divine with an arrow and
   22 inquire by graven images and inspect a liver.    The oracle
       against Jerusalem is favourable, to throw up a rampart, to
       open his mouth with a war cry ; to raise his voice with shout-
                    (p) The prophet. (J) Jehovah.
         Ch. XXII.                  EZEKIEL.
            ing, to cast up a rampart against her gates to raise a mount
         23 and build towers for his engines.   Now while this man is to
            them as one consulting an oracle, that other is causing his
            usurpation to be remembered.
         24    Therefore thus saith the Lord, Because you have brought
            your iniquities into remembrance by disclosing your impie-
            ties ; that your sins may be seen, by all your acts of impiety and
            by your devices—because you have brought them into remem-
         25 brance, for them you shall be taken. And as for thee, thou profane
            wicked ruler of Israel, whose day is coming at the appointed
         26 season, there is an end to thy usurpation.Thus saith the Lord,
            Thou hast pulled off the coronet, and put on the imperial dia-
            dem.   It shall not be such.  Thou hast debased what was high
         27 and exalted what was low.     To usurpation, usurpation, usur-
            pation I will expose it ; alas for it !Such it shall be till He
            come, to whom it of right belongeth ; and I will give it to him.
         28     Now as for thee, son of man, prophesy and thou shalt say,
            Thus saith the Lord, with regard to the Ammonites and their
            reproach even thus thou shalt say,     sword, sword, drawn for
            slaughter, and drawn for destruction, be lifted up that thou
         29 mayst glisten.  By the vain vision and false prophesying con-
            cerning thee, the day came at the appointed season, for turn-
         30 ing thee on the necks of wounded transgressors.    There is an
            end of usurpation ; turn back ; tarry not. In the place where
         31 thou wast born, in thine own land I will judge thee.And I will
            pour out my wrath upon thee ; and with the fire of mine indig-
            nation blow upon thee, and deliver thee into the hands of bar-
         32 barous men skilled in destruction.  Thou shalt be fuel for fire
            and thy blood shall be in the midst of thy land.There shall no
            more be any remembrance of thee.    I the Lord have spoken.
         XXII.      Then a word of the Lord came to me, saying, Now,
          2 son of man, if thou will judge this bloody city, then point out
            to it all its iniquities and thou shalt say, Thus saith the Lord,
          3 Lord,     city, which sheddest blood in the midst of thee, to
            cause thy time to come ; and which makest idols against thy-
          4 self to pollute thyself.In the blood which thou hast shed, thou
            art fallen : and with thine idols, which thou hast made, thou
            art defiled : and thou hast caused thy days to draw near, and
            hast brought on the term of thy years ; therefore I have made
       XXII.                  EZEKIEL.
   Ch.
       thee a scoff to the nations, and a mocking stock to all the coun-
    5 tries—to those near and to those far from thee ; and they shall
    6 insult thee, thou impure, infamous and abandoned city.   Be-
       hold in thee the princes of the house of Israel banded them-
       selves, every one with his relations, that they might shed blood.
    7 In thee they reviled father and mother ; and in thee practised
    8 injustice against the stranger.They oppressed the widow and
       the orphan ; and in thee they despised my holy things and pro-
    9 faned my sabbaths.   In thee men became robbers, that in thee
       they might shed blood.   And they ate upon the mountains
       near thee; and in the midst of thee committed abominable
    10 things. In thee they uncovered the nakedness of a father ; and
   11 in thee humbled a woman in a state of separation. In thee one
       debauched his neighbour's wife ; another wantonly defiled his
       daughter in law ; and another humbled his sister, his father's
   12 daughter.   In thee they received bribes to shed blood.In thee
       they took interest and usury, and thou hast completed thy
       wickedness by oppression. And me thou hast forgotten, saith
    13 the Lord.  Now when I lay my hand on thee to destroy thee,
       for what thou hast done and for the blood which hath been
    14 shed in thee ; will thy heart endure?Will thy hands be strong
       in the day I deal with thee ? I the Lord have spoken and I
    15 will perform. I will scatter thee among the nations and dis-
       perse thee through the countries, and when thine impurity shall
    16 be consumed out of thee, I will take possession of thee in the
       sight of all the nations; and you shall know that I am the
    17 Lord.  Again a word of the Lord came to me, saying, son of
    18 man, Behold to me the house of Israel are all become mix-
       ed with brass and iron and tin and lead with a mixture of
    19 silver. Therefore say, Thus saith the Lord, Lord, Because
       you are become one mass, I will therefore gather you into the
    20 midst of Jerusalem : as silver and brass and iron and tin and
       lead are put in a furnace, that the fire may be blown on it and
       that it may be melted ; So will I take you in my wrath and
    21 gather you and melt you.    And I will blow upon you with
       the fire of my wrath and you shall be melted in the midst of
    22 it. As silver is melted in the midst of a furnace ; so shall you
       be melted in the midst of it; and you shall know that I the
       Lord have poured out my wrath on you.
                                                                                                                                 ;
                Ch. XXIII.                                     EZEKIEL.
                23          Again a word of the Lord came to nie, saying ; Son of
                24 man say to this land, Thou art a land which was not watered
                     with showers ; nor did rain fall upon thee in the day of indigna-
               25 tion.          Its princes in the midst of it were like roaring lions, ra-
                     vening prey, devouring souls by oppression, yet receiving ho-
                     nours ; and thy widows were multiplied in the midst of thee.
               26 Its priests also despised my law and profaned my holy things
                     between what was holy and what was profane they made no
                     difference, nor did they distinguish between the unclean and
                     the clean.          And from my sabbaths they hid their eyes and I was
               27 profaned in the midst of them.                            Its chiefs in the midst of it were
                     like wolves, ravening prey, to the shedding of innocent blood, that
               28 they may glut their greediness.                           Theyshall fall together with its
                     prophets who anointed them, seeing vanities, prophesying lies,
                     saying,        Thus saith the Lord, Though the Lord did not
               29 speak, crushing by usurped authority the people of the land,
                     and ravening prey, oppressing the poor and needy, and pay-
                     ing no regard to strangers to the administration of jus-
               30 tice.          Though I sought among them for a man of integrity
                     and for one who stood uprightly before me in the time of in-
                     dignation that I might utterly destroy it, yet I found none :
               31 therefore I poured out my wrath upon it, to destroy it utterly
                     with the fire of mine indignation.                            Their ways I have requited
                     on their heads, saith the Lord, Lord.
               XXIII.               Again a word of the Lord came to me, saying,
                 2 Son of man, there were two women, daughters of the same
                 3 mother, who in their youth had committed whoredom in
                 I Egypt.           There they were first deflowered.                         And these were their
                     names—the eldest was called Oola and her sister, Ooliba.                                             And
                     when they became mine and had borne me sons and daughters,
                     These were their names—Oola was called Samaria, and Ooli-
                 5 ba, Jerusalem.                And Oola wantonly left me and attached her-
                 6 self to her lovers—to the Assyrians her neighbours, whose
                     generals and leaders were clothed in blue.                                      And the chosen
                 7 youth were all horsemen, mounted on horses.                                              But though
                     she indulged her wantonness with them, who were all the prin-
                     cipal men of the Assyrians, and with all them to whom she at-
                 8 tached herself; and defiled herself with all their idols; yet she
                     did not forsake her fornication with Egypt because they had
                                                                                                      ;
                                              EZEKIEL.
      Ch. XXIII.
       9 lain with her in her youth and first deflowered her.                               Where-
          fore I delivered her into the hands of her lovers, into the hands
     10 of the Assyrians to whom she had attached herself.                               These ex-
          posed her shame.             They took her sons and her daughters, and
          slew her with the sword, and she became a common talk for
          women, and by her they gave warning to their daughters.
     11 Though her sister Ooliba saw this, yet she became abandoned
     12 and more inordinate in her fornication than her sister.                              To the
                                                  attached herself                the
          sons of the Assyrians she                                       —to           rulers and
          generals near her who were arrayed in sumptuous apparel, who
          were horsemen mounted on horses.                           They were all chosen
     13 youths.          When I saw that they were polluted; and that both
          took the same course ; and that this one was adding to her
     14 fornication; for upon seeing men ponrtrayed on the wall, the
     15 pictures of the Chaldeans drawn to the life with a pencil, hav-
          ing their loins girded with embroidered girdles, and deep dyed
          turbans on their heads ; the majestic countenance of all resem-
     16 bling that of the Chaldees of the land of her nativity ; she be-
          came attached to them by the sight of her eyes, and sent mes-
     17 sengers to them to the land of Chaldea.                          And the sons of Ba-
          bylon came to her, lay with her, and polluted her in whore-
          dom.      And when she was polluted by them, though her mind
     18 was alienated from them, still she discovered her whoredom
          and exposed her shame.                  So my mind became alienated from
     19 her as it had been from her sister.                        As thou hast multiplied
          thy whoredom, to call into remembrance the days of thy youth,
     20 in which thou didst play the harlot in Egypt, and though con-
     21 nected with the Chaldeans, men of beastly lust, hast looked
          back to the transgressions of thy youth—to what thou didst
     22 in the stew of Egypt where thou wast first deflowered.                               There-
          fore        Ooliba, thus saith the Lord, Behold I will raise up
          against thee thy lovers from whom thy mind is alienated
     23 and I will bring them against thee on every side—the chil-
          dren of Babylon, even all the Chaldeans, Phakuk and Soue
          and Uchoue and all the Assyrians with them, chosen youths,
          leaders and generals, all men of high rank and renown, mounted
     24 on horses.          And they shall come against thee from the north
          with chariots and wheeled carriages, and a multitude of peoples
           with bucklers and shields.                And when a guard is set on thee
                VOL. II.                                 4 o
              XXIII.                  EZEKIEL.
         Ch.
             round about, I will give judgment before them and they shall
         25 punish thee by their judgments.      And I will give a loose to
             myjealousy ; and they shall deal with thee with furious wrath,
             they shall cut off thy nose and thine ears ; and the remains of
             thee they shall hack with a sword.     They shall take thy sons
             and thy daughters ; and a fire shall devour the residue of thee.
         26 And they shall strip thee of thy raiment, and take those jewels
         27 which are thy boast.   And I will remove thine impieties which
             spring from thyself, and thy fornication which sprang from
             the land of Egypt ; and thou shalt never lift up thine eyes to
         28 them, nor shalt thou any more remember Egypt.           For thus
             saith the Lord, Lord, Behold I deliver thee into the hands of
             them whom thou hatest, and from whom thy mind is with-
         29 drawn; and they shall deal Ispitefully with thee, and take all
             those things for which thou hast laboured and toiled :      and
             thou shalt be naked and in disgrace and the shame of thy
             whoredom shall be made public.        Thine impiety and they
         30 whoredom have brought these things on thee.        By thy going
             a whoring after the nations, thou hast polluted thyself with
         31 their inordinate lusts.  Thou hast walked in the way of thy sis-
             ter ; therefore I will put her cup into thy hands.
         32     Thus saith the Lord, Thou shalt drink the cup of thy sis-
             ter, which is deep, and which is large, and which is foaming
         33 over, to cause complete intoxication, that thou mayst be filled
             with fainting—even that cup of astonishment, the cup of thy
         34 sister Samaria.   Let her take this : and I will turn away her
             festivals and her new moons; for I the Lord have spoken,
             saith the Lord.
          35     Therefore thus saith the Lord, Because thou hast forgotten
             and cast me behind thee, take thou the effects of thine impiety
             and of thy whoredom.
          36     Again the Lord said to me, Son of man, wilt thou not
             arraign Oola and Ooliba, and announce to them their iniqui-
             ties ? That they have committed adultery and there is blood
          37 on their hands ? They have committed adultery with their idols ;
             and caused their children whom they bore to me to pass
          38 through fire for them.   And when they had done this to me,
          39 they polluted my holy things and profaned my sabbaths ; for
    Oh. XXIV.               EZEKIEL.
       when they had slaughtered their children to their idols, they
       went into my sanctuary to profane it.
    40    Now because they have acted thus in my house ; and be-
       cause, for the men who came from afar, to whom messengers
       had been despatched, thou didst immediately on their coming,
       anoint thyself with oil and paint thine eyes with stibium, and
    41 adorn thyself with sumptuous attire, and sit on a covered so-
       pha with a table set before it ; and they were regaled with mine
    42 incense and mine oil, and joined in the harmonious song, even
       with men of the common herd who had come from the wil-
       derness ; (though they had put bracelets on their hands and a
    43 crown of exquisite beauty on their heads ; I said, surely they
       do not commit adultery with these !But she acted the harlot
    44 and they went in unto her : in the same manner as they go in
       to a common woman, so did they go in unto Oola and to Ooli-
    45 ba to commit iniquity) therefore these are righteous men and
       they will punish them with the punishment of an adulteress
       and with the punishment for blood.Because they are adulter-
    46 esses and there is blood on their hands, thus saith the Lord,
       Lord, Bring up a multitude against them and expose them to
    47 tumult and rapine ; and stone them with the stones of tu-
       multuous crowds ; and stab them with their swords.Let their
       sons and their daughters be slain and their houses burned with
    48 fire, that I may remove impiety out of the land and that all
       women may take warning, and not commit the impieties which
    49 these have done.Thus shall your impiety be recompensed on
       you ; and for your sins you shall receive retribution ; and you
       shall know that I am the Lord.
    XXIV. XII. AGAIN in the ninth year, in the tenth month,
       on the tenth day of the month, a word of the Lord came to
       me, saying,
     2    Son of man write down for thyself for a day, from this clay
       on which the king of Babylon hath cleterminately set himseli
     3 against Jerusalem ; even from this very day ; and speak a para-
       ble against that provoking family, and thou shalt say to them,
     4    Thus saith the Lord, Set on the cauldron and pour water
       into it ; and throw into it the pieces of meat, every choice piece,
       the flesh of the thigh and the shoulder separated from the
          eh. XXIY.                  EZEKIEL.
           5 bones, and these of the choicest cattle ; and burn the bones
             under them.    It hath boiled and the bones have been sodden
             in it.  Therefore thus saith the Lord, Ah ! bloody city ! a
             kettle, in which there is verdigrease in its very substance, and
             that verdigrease is not gone out of it. She hath brought it out
             on every member of her : no lot fell upon her.     Because her
             blood is in the midst of her ; I have ordered it to be poured
             out on a smooth stone : I have not poured it on the ground for
           8 the earth to cover it.   That wrath may be kindled and ven-
             geance executed, I have ordered the blood to be poured out
             on a smooth stone, that it may not be concealed.
           9    Therefore thus saith the Lord, I will enlarge the pile, and
          10 heap on wood and cause the fire to burn, that the flesh may be
          11 consumed and the broth evaporated: and it shall stand on the
             coals that the brass may be heated red hot and melted in the
         12 midst of its impurity and its verdigrease quite destroyed ; so
         13 that this its abundant verdigrease may not proceed from it.   Its
             verdigrease shall be exposed to shame.      Because thou wast
             polluted what else could be done, since thou wouldst not be
         14 cleansed till I filled up my wrath ?    I the Lord have spoken.
             He shall come : and I will act.    I will not defer ; nor will I
             shew compassion.   According to thy ways and according to
             thy lusts I will judge thee, saith the Lord, therefore I will
             judge thee according to thy blood guiltiness ; aud I will judge
             thee according to thine inordinate lusts,     corrupt, infamous
             and very provoking city.
         15     Then a word of the Lord came to me, saying, Son of
         16 man, Behold I take from thee the desires of thine eyes with
         17 a stroke.  Thou must not mourn, nor utter lamentation.       Let
             sighing for blood and grief of loins be suppressed.   Thy hair
             shall be platted on thy head and thy sandals shall be on thy
            feet.  Thou must not receive comfort from their lips, nor eat
             funeral bread.
         18     So I spoke to the people in the morning as he had order-
            ed me in the evening.     And when I did in the morning as I
         19 was commanded, the people said to me, Why dost thou not
         20 tell us what these things mean which thou art doing ?     There-
            upon I said to them, A word of the Lord came to me, say-
         21 ing, Say to the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord, Behold
                                                                                                                ;
       Ch. XXV.                                   EZEKIEL.
            I will profane my sanctuary, the boast of your strength, the
            desire of your eyes, and for which your souls are moved with
            compassion; and your sons and your daughters whom you
       22 left shall fall by the sword : and you shall do as I have done.
            You shall not receive comfort from their mouth nor eat fune-
       23 ral bread ; your locks of hair shall be on your head, and your
            sandals on your feet ; you shall neither utter lamentations nor
            shed tears ; but shall pine away for your iniquities and exhort
       24 one another.             And Ezekiel shall be for a sign to you, (accord-
            ing to all that he hath done you shall do when these things
       25 happen) and you shall know that I am the Lord.                                         And with
            regard to thee son of man, will not this be the case ?                                   On the
            day when I take from them their strength—that which was
            their exultation and boast and the desire of their eyes and the
       26 pride of their soul—their sons and their daughters ; on that
       27 day one who escapeth shall come to thee to tell thee the news
            on that day thy mouth shall be opened to him who escapeth.
            Thou shalt speak and no more be dumb and thou shalt be a
            sign to them ; and they shall know that I am the Lord.
       XXV.             Again a word of the Lord came to me, saying, Son of
         2 man, set thy face against the children of Amnion and prophe-
            sy against them and thou shalt say to the children of Ammon,
        3 Hear a word of the Lord, Thus saith the Lord, Because you
            exulted over my sanctuary ; because it was profaned and over
            the land of Israel because it was laid waste, and over the house
        4 of Juda, because they went into captivity ; therefore behold I
            deliver you to the children of Kedeni for a possession ; and in
            their excursions they shall inhabit thee and pitch their tents in
        5 thee.        They shall eat thy fruits and drink thy liquors.                               And I
            will make the city of Ammon feeding places for camels; and
            the land of the Ammonites a pasture for sheep ; and you shall
         6 know that I am the Lord.                        For thus saith the Lord, Because
            thou didst clap thy hands and stamp with thy feet, and exult
        7 in thy soul over the land of Israel : therefore I will stretch
            forth my hand against thee, and deliver thee up for a spoil to
            the nations : and I will utterly destroy thee from among the
            peoples, and cause thee to perish out of the countries, and you
            shall know that I am the Lord.
             XXVI.                 EZEKIEL.
         Ch.
          8    Thus saith the Lord, Because Moab said, Behold ! shall
            not the house of Israel and Juda be like all the nations ?
          9 Therefore behold I will loosen the shoulder of Moab from
            his frontier cities, that beautiful country the house of Betha-
            simoth, at the head of the fountain of the city on the sea
         10 shore. I have set the children of Kedem over the Ammonites,
            I have given them to him for an inheritance, that there may be
         11 no remembrance of the Ammonites, and upon Moab I will
            execute vengeance ; and they shall know that I am the Lord.
         12    Thus saith the Lord, Because Idumea in executing ven-
            geance on the house of Juda gratified private resentment and
         13 executed the sentence with rigour.   Therefore thus saith the
            Lord, I will also stretch forth my hand against Idumea, and de-
            stroy out of it man and beast and make it a desolation.  And
            they who are driven out of Thaiman shall fall by the sword.
         14 And I will execute vengeance on Idumea by the hand of my
            people Israel who shall deal with Idumea according to mine
            indignation, and according to my wrath ; and they shall know
            my vengeance saith the Lord.
         15    For the same cause, thus saith the Lord, Because the
            Philistines acted with revenge and with joy of heart heighten-
         16 ed the punishment to destroy utterly ; therefore thus saith the
            Lord, Behold I will stretch forth my hand against the Philis-
            tines, and utterly exterminate the Cretans, and destroy the
         17 remnants which inhabit the sea coast, and inflict on them great
            punishments ; and they shall know that I am the Lord, when I
            execute my vengeance on them.
         XXVI. XIII. AGAIN it came to pass in the eleventh year
            on the first of the month, a word of the Lord came to me,
            saying,
          2     Son of man, Because Sor hath said against Jerusalem,
            Aha! She is trodden down; the nations have destroyed her;
            she is turned over to me ; she that was full is laid waste,
          3 therefore thus saith the Lord, Behold I am against thee, Sor,
            and I will bring up many nations against thee, as the sea
          4 cometh up with its waves.   And they shall demolish the walls
             of Sor and break down thy towers ; and I will brush away the
           5 loose earth from it and make it a bare rock.It shall be a place
             to dry nets in the midst of the sea. As I have spoken, saith
                                                                                                                         ;
     Ch. XXVI.                                        EZEKIEL.
        6 the Lord, It shall indeed be a prey for the nations; aDd its
            daughters on the continent shall be slain with the sword : and
        7 they shall know that I am the Lord.                                For thus saith the Lord,
            Behold against thee, Sor, I will bring from the North, Nabu-
            chodonosar king of Babylon, a king of kings, with horses and
            chariots and horsemen, and a great assembly of many nations.
        8 Thy daughters on the main land he will slay with the sword
            and he will lay siege to thee and surround thee with works,
            and make a rampart against thee round about, with places for
       9 engines ; and arrange his lances over against thee, and with his
      10 battle axes demolish thy walls and thy towers.                                            By reason of
            the multitude of his horses their dust shall cover thee ; and
            with the neighing of his horses and the rumbling of his cha-
            riot wheels thy walls shall shake when he entereth thy gates
      11 like one entering a city from the plain.                                  With the hoofs of his
            horses all thy streets shall be trampled.                                He will slay thy peo-
            ple with the sword ; and level to the ground the confidence of
      12 thy strength ; and make a prey of thine army, and a spoil of
            thy wealth ; and break down thy walls and demolish thy lovely
            houses; and thy stones and thy timbers and thy rubbish he
      13 will throw into the midst of the sea.                                And he will put an end
            to the multitude of thy musicians ; and the sound of thy
      14 psalteries shall no more be heard.                                 I will indeed make thee a
            bare rock.           Thou shalt be a place for drying nets, thou shalt
            never be rebuilded any more ; for I the Lord have spoken,
            saith the Lord.
      15          For thus saith the Lord, Lord, to Sor: At the sound of thy
            fall ; at the groans of thy wounded, when the sword is drawn in
      16 the midst of thee, shall not the islands quake ?                                       Yes, from their
            thrones will come clown all the chiefs of the maritime nations,
            and they will take their crowns from their heads, and strip off
            their embroidered robes.                      They will be struck with consterna-
            tion and sit on the ground, and be in dread of their own de-
      17 struction and groan for thee.                            And they will take up a lamen-
            tation for thee and say to thee, " How art thou destroyed from
            the sea,             renowned city ! which didst impress the terror of
      18 thee on all who inhabit its shores !                              The isles also will be terri-
       19 fled at the day of thy fall.                     For thus saith the Lord, Lord, When
            I make thee a desolate city, like cities never to be rebuilded,
         Ch. XXVII.                  EZEKIEL.
            when I bring up the abyss against thee; much water shall co-
         20 ver thee.  And I will press thee down to them who go down to
            the pit, to the people of old ; and make thee dwell in the depths
            of the earth—in an everlasting desert, with them who go down
            to the pit ; that thou mayst never be rebuilt nor rise again in
         21 the land of life. I will make thee a desolation ; and thou shalt
            never come into existence again, saith the Lord, Lord.
         XXVII.      Then a word of the Lord came to me saying, There-
          2 fore, son of man, take up a lamentation for Sor and thou shalt
            say to Sor, which is situate at the entrance of the sea, the mart
          3 of nations from many isles, thus saith the Lord to Sor, thou
          4 saidst, " I have clothed myself with beauty." In the heart of
          5 the sea thy sons clothed thee with beauty for Beelim.The ce-
            dars from Senir cut into planks have been built into ships for
            thee ; they took cypresses from Lebanon to make for thee taper-
          6 ing masts: from the groves of Bashan they made thy oars.
            Thy temples they built of ivory and thy roomy houses from
            the isles of the Chetians : cotton with embroidery from Egypt was
            the covering of thy bed.  To add to thy glory, and that thou
            mightest clothe thyself with blue and purple, thy clothing came
          8 from the isles of Elisa.  The inhabitants of Sidon were thy
            captains ; and the Aradians were thy mariners ; thine own wise
          9 men, Sor, who were in thee, were thy pilots.   The elders of
            Biblii, even their wise men who were in thee, invigorated thy
            counsel. And all the ships of the sea and all the mariners of
         10 the western world were in thy service. Persians and Lydians
            and Libyans were in thine army.  Thy warriors hung up in thee
         11 shields and helmets.  They increased thy glory.   The Aradi-
            ans, the army on thy walls, were guards in thy towers ; they
            hung up their quivers on thy shoulders round about.    They
         12 made thy beauty perfect.  The Karchadians purchased of thee
            for exportation, from thy vast stock of all kinds of merchan-
            dize ; and paid thee for their purchases silver and gold and iron
         13 and tin and lead.  Hellas, even that whole country and those
            stretching beyond it, traded with thee in the souls of men and
         14 supplied thy market with vessels of brass.From the house of
            Thogarma thy market was supplied with horses and horsemen.
         15 The sons of the Bhodians were thy merchants : from the isles
            they plentifully supplied thy market with ivory ; and in exchange
    Oh. XXVII.                  EZEKIEL.
    16 thou didst supply them with thy merchandise, with slaves a
       part of thy exports from thy vast stock of wares, with stacte
    17 and embroideries from Tharsis and Kamoth and Chorchor.      Ju-
       da also and the children of Israel traded with thee in the sale
       of wheat and myrrh and cassia ; and for thy merchandises sup-
    18 plied thee chiefly with honey and oil and frankincense. Damas-
       cus was thy customer for thine abundant wares of all kinds,
       they had wine from Chelbon, so they paid for their purchases
    19 with wool from Miletus and with wine.     From Asel thou wast
       supplied with manufactured iron, which was a part of thy mer-
   20 chandise by a circuitous trade.   Daidan was a dealer with thee
   21 and supplied thee with choice cattle for carriages.  Arabia and
       all the chiefs of Kedar dealt with thee, and paid thee camels
   22 and lambs and rams for what they purchased of thee.    The mer-
       chants of Saba and Kamma traded with thee with the choicest
       spiceries and precious stones ; they gave gold also for thy mer-
   23 chandise.   Charra and Chana also were thy customers and so
   24 were Assur and Charman : they supplied thy market with blue
   25 cloth and choice merchandise bound up in bales.        Fleets of
       cypress ships were employed in thy trade.   So with this multi-
       tude and with thy merchandise thou wast filled and deeply la-
   26 den in the heart of the sea.     Into deep water thy mariners
       steered thee.  In the midst of the sea the south wind hath
   27 wrecked thee.    Thine armies, and the gains of thee and of thy
       factors, with thy mariners, and thy pilots, and thy coun-
       sellors, and thy factors and all thy warriors were on board of
       thee : and all this assemblage of thine which are in thee shall
   28 sink in the heart of the sea on the day of thy ruin. At the scream
   29 of thy voice thy pilots will be astounded.     They who handle
       the oar and they on board ships will quit their vessels ; and
   30 they who frequent the sea will stand on the land, and with
       their voice raise a mournful cry for thee, and scream bitterly
       and put earth on their heads and strew themselves with ashes,
   32 and their children will take up a lamentation for thee a peculiar
   33 song of woe for Sor—" what immense wealth didst thou acquire
      from the sea ! with thine abundance thou didst fill nations ; and
   34 with thy traffic enrich all the kings of the earth.Now thou art
      overwhelmed in the sea; in deep water, thy merchandise, with
   35 all thy crew in thee. All thy mariners are fallen.  For thee all
          VOL. II.                 4 D
              XXVIII.                  EZEKIEL.
          Ch.
             tlie inhabitants of the isles are in distress, and their kings are
          36 struck with amaze, and tears bedew their countenance.          For
             thee the merchants of the nations express pity ; thou art utter-
             ly destroyed and never to be any more."
         XXVIII.        Again a word of the Lord came to me, saying, and
           2 thou son of man say to the prince of Tyre, Thus saith the
             Lord, Because thy heart is elated, and thou hast said, " I am a
             God." " I inhabit the dwelling of a god in the heart of the sea."
             Nowas for thee thou art a man and not aGod ; though thou hast
           3 set thy heart as the heart of a God.  Art thou wiser than Daniel ?
             Have not wise men taught thee with their knowledge?          Didst
             thou by thy knowledge, or thine own understanding, procure
          5 for thyself power and gold and silver in thy treasuries ?   By thy
             great skill and thy traffic thou hast increased thy wealth ; and
          6 with thy wealth thy heart is elated ; therefore, Thus saith the
          7 Lord, Since thou hast set thy heart as the heart of a God ; for
             this, behold I will bring against thee strange ravagers from the
             nations, and they shall unsheath their swords against thee and
             against the beauty of thy wisdom ; and they shall bring down
          8 thy beauty to destruction and trample thee down; and thou
             shalt die the death of wounded men in the heart of the sea
          9 Wilt thou say, "I am a God," in the presence of them who
             are slaying thee ?  Thou indeed art but a man and not a God.
         10 Among a multitude of uncircumcised thou shalt die by the
             hand of strangers, for I have spoken, saith the Lord.
         11     Then a word of the Lord came to me, saying, Son of man,
             take up a lamentation for the prince of Tyre and say to him,
         12 Thus saith the Lord, Lord, thou wast an impression of resem-
         13 blance and a crown of beauty.        In the delightful paradise of
             God thou wast born,     Thou hast been adorned with every pre-
             cious stone, the sardis and topaz and emerald and carbun-
             cle and sapphire and jasper, and with silver and gold and the
             ligure and agate, and amethyst and chrysolite and beryl and
             onyx; and hast filled thy treasuries and thy stores with gold.
         14 From the day thou wast created thou wast with the cherub.       On
             the holy mountain of God I placed thee, thou wast born in the
         15 midst of sparkling stones.       Thou in thy days wast spotless
             from the day thou wast created, until iniquities were found
         16 in thee.   By reason of thine abundant traffic thou didst fill thy
         XXIX.                     EZEKIEL.
     Ch.
        stores with iniquity and commit sins; therefore thou art cast
        out slain from the mountain of God; and from amidst the
     17 sparkling stones the cherub hath dragged thee.       Thy heart was
        elated because of thy beauty ; with thy beauty thine understand-
        ing was perverted.    For the multitude of thy sins I have dash-
        ed thee on the ground ; in the presence of kings I have made
     18 thee a public example.     For the multitude of thy sins and the
        iniquities of thy traffic I have denied thy sanctuaries ; and from
        the midst of thee I will bring out a fire which shall devour
        thee.   And I will make thee like ashes on the ground, in the
     19 sight of all them who behold thee.        And all that knew thee
        among the nations shall lament over thee.      Thou art utterly de-
         stroyed and never to be any more.
     20     Then a word of the Lord came to me, saying, Son of man,
         set thy face against Sidon, and prophesy against it and say,
         Thus saith the Lord, Behold I am against thee, Sidon, and I
         shall be glorified by thee ; and thou shalt know that I am the
         Lord.   When I execute judgments on thee, then shall I be hal-
     23 lowed by thee.    There shall be blood and death in thy streets,
         and the victims of the sword shall fall in and around thee:
     24 and they shall know that I am the Lord.         And there shall no
         more be in the house of Israel a pricking briar nor a grieving
         thorn, by reason of those around them, who despised them : and
     25 they shall know that I am the Lord.      Thus saith the Lord, Lord,
         When I gather Israel from among the nations where they were
         scattered, I shall be hallowed by them even in the sight of the
         peoples and nations and they shall dwell in their land which I
     26 gave to my servant Jacob.      And they shall dwell there secure-
         ly and shall build houses and plant vineyards : they shall in-
         deed dwell securely when I have executed judgment on all
         who despised them—on all their neighbours around them;
         and they shall know that I the Lord am their God and the
         God of their fathers.
     XXIX.        XIV. IN the tenth year, in the tenth month, on the
         first day of the month, a word of the Lord came to me, saying,
      2 Son of man, set thy face against Pharao king of Egypt, and
         prophesy against him and against all Egypt; and say, Thus
      3 saith the Lord, Behold I am against Pharao—that great dragon
                                                                        —;:;
        Ch. XXIX.                   EZEKIEL.
            which walloweth in the midst of his rivers, and saith, "These
         4 rivers are mine and I made them."    And I will put grapples in
            thy jaws, and cause the fishes of thy river to stick close to thy
          5 fins ; and I will drag thee out of the river, and give thee and
            all the fishes of thy river a sudden cast.On the face of the plain
            thou shalt fall and shalt not be gathered nor composed. To the
          6 beasts of the earth and the birds of the air I have given thee for
            food.  And all the inhabitants of Egypt shall know that I am
            the Lord.
             Because thou hast been a staff of reed to the house of Israel
          7 when they took hold of thee with their hand thou didst break
            even when every hand was clapping against them, and when
            they leaned on thee thou didst break and disjoint all their loin
         8 therefore thus saith the Lord, Behold I will bring a sword
            against thee and destroy out of thee man and beast.   And the
          9 land of Egypt shall be a destruction and a desolation ; and they
            shall know that I am the Lord.
        10     Because thou saidst, " These rivers are mine ; I made
            them ; " therefore behold I am against thee and against all thy
            rivers; and I will deliver up the land of Egypt to desolation
            and sword and destruction.   From Magdolus and Syene even
        11 to the borders of Ethiopia, no foot of man shall pass across it,
            nor shall a foot of beast traverse it ; and for forty years it shall
        12 not be inhabited.   I will indeed make its land a desolation in
            the midst of a desolated land, and its cities, in the midst of de-
            solated cities, forty years.And I will scatter Egypt among
            the nations, and disperse them through the countries.
         13    Thus saith the Lord, After forty years, I will gather the
         14 Egyptians from the nations where they were scattered; and I
            will bring back the Egyptian captives, and settle them in the
            land of Pathora—in the land from which they were taken.
         15 And it shall be the basest of all governments ; it shall no more
            be exalted against the nations.  For I will make them few and
            of little account, that they may not be great among the nations.
         16 And they shall no more be the confidence of the house of Is-
            rael, bringing iniquity into remembrance by their going after
            them; and they shall know that I am the Lord.
         17    Again it came to pass in the seven and twentieth year on
            the first day of the first month, that a word of the Lord came to
                                                             —;
   Ch. XXX.                 EZEKIEL.
      me, saying, Son of man, Nabuchodonosar king of Babylon
   18 hath caused his army to undergo hard service at Tyre.Every
      head is bald and every shoulder peeled ; and he and his army
      employed against Tyre, have received no wages ; though they
   19 have undergone hard service against it.Thus saith the Lord,
      Behold I will give to Nabuchodonosar king of Babylon the
      land of Egypt. And he shall make a prey of its prey, and a spoil
   20 of its spoil.And it shall be wages for his army.For his service
      which he hath performed against Tyre, 1 have given him the
   21 land of Egypt. Thus saith the Lord, Lord ; In that day there
      shall spring up a horn for the whole house of Israel, and I will
      give thee an open mouth in the midst of them, and they shall
      know that I am the Lord.
   XXX.      xlgain a word of the Lord came to me saying, Son of
    3 man prophesy and say, Thus saith the Lord, Alas ! alas ! the
      day ; for the day of the Lord is near.A cloudy day ! it shall
    4 be the end of nations. A sword shall come upon the Egyp-
      tians ; and there shall be consternation in the land of Ethiopia
      and the wounded shall fall in Egypt, and its foundations shall
    5 be shaken.   Persians and Cretans and Lydians and Libyans
      and all the mixed people, and some of the children of my co-
    6 venant shall fall in it by the sword.The fortresses of Egypt
      shall fall, and down shall come the pride of her strength, from
      Magdolus even to Syene—by the sword they shall fall in it, saith
    7 the Lord.  And it shall be desolate in the midst of desolated
      countries ; and their cities shall be in the midst of desolated
    8 cities. And they shall know that I am the Lord ; when I send
      a fire against Egypt, and all her helpers are trodden down.
     9 In that day swift messengers will go forth to cause Ethiopia
       to vanish : and there shall be consternation among them in
       the day of Egypt.For behold it is come.
    10    Thus saith the Lord, Lord, I will indeed destroy the
       multitude of the Egyptians by the hand of Nabuchodonosar
    11 king of Babylon—of him and his people.  They are ravagers
       sent from nations to destroy a land ; and they shall all un-
       sheath their swords against Egypt ; and the land shall be fill-
    12 ed with the slain.And I will dry up their rivers and destroy
       the land, and the fulness thereof by the hands of strangers, I
    13 the Lord have spoken. For thus saith the Lord, Lord, When
                                                                                                                       ;
               Ch. XXXI.                                   EZEKIEL.
                     I have destroyed the nobles from Memphis, and the chiefs of
                     Memphis out of the land of Egypt, and they shall be no more
               14 then I will destroy the land of Pathora, and send a fire against
               15 Tanis and execute vengeance on Diospolis.                                  And I will pour
                     out my wrath on Sais, the strength of Egypt, and utterly de-
               16 stroy the multitude of Memphis : and I will send a fire against
                    Egypt, and Syene shall be confounded ; and at Diospolis there
               17 shall be a breach ; and water shall gush out.                             The young men of
                    Heliopolis and Boubaste shall fall by the sword, and the women
               18 shall go into captivity.                 And at Taphnis the day will be darken-
                    ed, when I there break the sceptres of Egypt, for the pride of
                    her strength shall be destroyed there : and a cloud shall cover
               19 her; and her daughters shall be carried away captives.                                        Thus
                    will I execute judgment on Egypt, and they shall know that
                    I am the Lord.
               20         And it came to pass in the eleventh year, in the first month,
                    on the seventh of the month, a word of the Lord came to me,
               21 saying, Son of man, I bruised the arms of Pharao king of
                    Egypt ; and behold he hath made no supplication for a cure
               22 to be given, for a poultice to be applied ; for strength to be
                    given to handle a sword, Therefore thus saith the Lord, Lord,
                    Behold I am against Pharao king of Egypt ; and I will break
                    his strong and extended arms, and cause the sword to drop
              23 from his hand.              And I will scatter Egypt among the nations, and
              24 disperse them through the countries.                              And I will strengthen
                    the arms of the king of Babylon, and put my sword into his
                    hand, and he shall wield it against Egypt, and make a prey
              25 of his prey, and a spoil of his spoil.                          I will indeed strengthen
                    the arms of the king of Babylon ; and the arms of Pharao shall
                    be enfeebled ; and they shall know that I am the Lord.                                    When
                    I put my sword into the hand of the king of Babylon, he shall
              26 wield it against the land of Egypt.                           And I will scatter Egypt
                    among the nations, and disperse them through the countries,
                    and they shall all know that I am the Lord.
              XXXI.              Again in the eleventh year, in the third month, on the
                    first day of the month, a word of the Lord came to me, saying,
                2 Son of man say to Pharao king of Egypt, and to his multitude,
                3 to whom hast thou likened thyself for thy loftiness?                                        Lo to
                    Assur ! he was a cypress on Libanus.                          Beautiful with branches
    Ch. XXXI.                    EZEKIEL.
     4 and lofty in stature.    His top was among the clouds.       Water
        nourished him.     The deep made him lofty.        It brought its
        streams about his roots, and sent forth its rills to all the trees
     5 of the plain.    By reason of this he was exalted in greatness
        above all the trees of the plain, and by the plentiful supply of
     6 water his branches spread.      Among his boughs all the birds
       of the air built their nests ; and under his branches all the
        beasts of the field brought forth their young ; and all the mul-
     7 titude of nations dwelt in its shade.      He was beautiful in his
        height by the multitude of his branches, because his roots
     8 shot out into abundance of water.        Even the cypresses such
        as were in the paradise of God and the pines were not to be
        compared with his shoots, nor were the fir trees comparable
       to his branches.    Not a tree in the garden of God was equal
     9 to him in beauty, on the account of the multitude of his
        branches; therefore, the trees of God's delicious paradise en-
    10 vied him on that account.      But thus saith the Lord, Because
        thou wast of great magnitude, therefore thou hast shot up thy
        top among the clouds.    Now when I saw that he was lifted up,
    11 I delivered him into the hands of the chief of nations, who
    12 accomplished his destruction.       Strangers, merciless ravagers
        from nations destroyed him.      They felled him on the moun-
        tains and his branches fell in all the vallies, and his shoots
        were trampled down in every field of the earth; and all the
        tribes of the nations came down from their shade, and levelled
    13 him to the ground.    Upon his ruins all the birds of the air rest-
        ed themselves ;   and all the wild beasts of the earth came
        against his shoots ; that none of the trees by the water might
    14 be exalted by their greatness : though they had shot up their
       top among the clouds, yet none of these water drinkers stood
        in their height before them ; they were all delivered up to
        death, to the depth of the earth, among the children of men, to
    15 them who go down to the pit.      Thus saith the Lord, On the day
        he went down to Hades, the abyss mourned for him.         I stayed
        its streams and restrained the abundance of water.        For him
        Libanus covered itself with darkness ; all the trees of the field
    16 were grieved for him.    At the sound of his fall the nations were
        shaken.   When he was pressed down to the mansion of the
        dead, with them who go down into the pit ; all the trees of the
        Oh. XXXIT.               EZEKIEL.
           garden comforted him in the earth—even the choice trees of
        17 Libanus, all that drink water; for they also went down with
           him to the mansion of the dead, among them who were vic-
           tims of the sword ; and his seed—they who dwelt nnder his
        18 shade were in the middle of their life destroyed.To whom-
           soever thou hast been likened, down with thee, and be pressed
           low with the trees of pleasure into the depth of the earth.In
           the midst of the uncircumcised thou shalt lie, with them who
           are the victims of the swords.Thus shall it be with Pharao
           and the multitude of his strength, saith the Lord, Lord.
        XXXII.      Now it came to pass in the tenth year, in the tenth
           month, on the first day of the month, that a word of the Lord
         2 came to me, saying, Son of man, take up a funeral song for
           Pharao king of Egypt, and thou shalt say to him, To the lion
           of nations thou hast been likened, but thou art like a dragon
           which is in the sea.Thou hast harried thy rivers and troubled
         3 the water with thy feet, and trampled thy rivers.Therefore
           thus saith the Lord, I will spread for thee the nets of many
         4 peoples, and drag thee up with my grapple.  And I will lay
           thee extended on the land. The plains shall be filled.And I
           will cause all the birds of the air to settle on thee and glut all
         5 the beasts of the earth.I will cast thy flesh on the mountains
         6 and fill them with thy blood : and the earth shall be drenched
           with the torrents from thee. By reason of the abundance of
           thee on the mountains, I will fill the vallies with parcels of thee.
         7 And in the act of extinguishing thee I will cover heaven and
           darken the stars thereof : I will veil the sun with a cloud and the
         8 moon shall not give her light : all that give light in the heaven
           shall be dark over thee; and I will overspread the earth with
           darkness, saith the Lord, Lord, and vex the heart of many
           peoples.
         9    When I bring thy captivity to the nations—to a land which
        10 thou hast not known ; then shall many nations groan for thee :
           and their kings will be struck with horror, when my sword is
           brandished before their faces, expecting their own ruin from the
        11 day of thy downfall.For thus saith the Lord, the sword of the
        12 king of Babylon shall come upon thee.With the swords of gi-
           ants I will overthrow thy strength.They are all ravagers from
           the nations ; and they shall destroy the haughtiness of Egypt,
                                                                          —
         XXXII.                   EZEKIEL.
    Ch.
    13 and all her strength shall be trampled down.         And I will de-
        stroy all her cattle from her great water ; and the foot of man
        shall no more trouble it, nor shall a hoof of cattle trample it.
    14 Thus shall their waters then be at rest, and their streams shall
    15 glide like oil, saith the Lord.    When I have devoted Egypt to
        destruction, and the land is wasted with the fulness thereof
        When I have scattered all its inhabitants, then they shall know
    16 that I am the Lord.     It is a song of woe and thou shalt sing it
        mournfully, and the daughters of the nations shall bewail
        Egypt, and over all her strength pour forth this plaint, saith the
        Lord, Lord.
    17     Again in the twelfth year, on the fifteenth day of the first
        month a word of the Lord came to me, saying, Son of man,
        sing a song of woe over the strength of Egypt, when the nations
    18 shall thrust down her daughters—shall thrust them down dead
        to the depth of the earth—to them who are going down into
    21 the pit ; in the midst of the sword's victims they shall fall with
        him.
           When all his power shall be laid to rest ; then will the giants
    19 say to thee, " Down with thee into the lowest pit ! excel whom
    20 thou mayst, down with thee, and be laid with the uncircumcis-
    22 ed, in the midst of the victims of the sword."     There lieth Assur
        and all his assembly ; all the victims of the sword are laid there ;
    23 and their sepulture is in the deep pit ; and around his tomb
        is his assembly—all the slain who fell by the sword, who made
        themselves dreaded in the land of life.
    24      There lieth Ailam with all his host around his tomb—all
        the slain who fell by the sword, and went down uncircumcised
        to the depth of the earth : having made themselves dreaded in
    25 the land of life, they have received their punishment with them
        who go down to the pit amidst the slain.
    26      There are deposited Mosoch and Thobel, each with all
        his host around his tomb—all his slain, all uncircumcised,
        slain with the sword.   Having made themselves dreaded in the
    27 land of life they are laid with the giants who fell of old ; who
        went down in their armour to the mansion of the dead, and
        had their swords placed under their heads ; but their iniquities
        were on their bones ; because they were the terror of all during
    28 their lives.   Thou indeed shalt be in the midst of the uncir-
            VOL. II.                 4 E
                                                                                                                                 :
                      XXXIII.                                 EZEKIEL.
              Ch.
                    cumcised,           with them who are the victims of the sword.
               29 There have been laid the princes of Assur; they, who gave
                    its strength to the wounding sword, are themselves laid to rest
               30 with the slain—with them who go down into the pit.                                                    There
                    lie the chiefs of the north, all the generals of Assur, who de-
                     scending wounded, are with their terror and their strength, laid
                     to rest, uncircumcised with the slain of the sword ; and have
                     borne their punishment with them who go down to the pit.
               31 These king Pharao shall see and be comforted for all his host,
               32 saith the Lord, Lord.                     Because I have spread the terror of him
                     over the land of life ; therefore he shall be in the midst of the
                     uncircumcised, with the slain of the sword—even Pharao and
                     all his multitude with him, saith the Lord, Lord.
               XXXIII. XV. AGAIN a word of the Lord came to me, say-
                     ing, Son of man speak to the children of thy people and thou
                 2 shalt say to them, With regard to a land on which I am about
                 3 to bring a sword, when the people of that land take a man, one
                     of themselves, and make him their watchman ; if he upon see-
                     ing the sword coming against the land, sound the trumpet and
                 4 warn the people ; and he who heareth the trumpet doth not take
                     warning ; and the sword cometh and cutteth him off; his blood
                 5 shall be on his own head.                         Because upon hearing the sound of
                     the trumpet he did not take warning ; his blood shall be upon
                 6 himself; for had he taken warning he might have saved his
                     life.      But if the watchman, upon seeing the sword coming,
                     doth not sound the trumpet, and the people are not warned,
                     and the sword cometh and taketh the life of any of them ; that
                     person is taken off because of his iniquity ; but his blood I will
                     require at the watchman's hands.
                  7        Now, as for thee son of man, I have made thee a watch-
                     man to the house of Israel, therefore thou shalt hear a word
                 8 from my mouth.                     When I say to the sinner, Thou shalt die
                     if thou dost not speak to warn the wicked from his way ; that
                     unrighteous man shall die for his iniquity; but his blood I
                  9 will require at thy hand.                      But if thou forewarn the wicked of
                      his way to turn him from it ; and he turn not from it, he shall
                     die for his wickedness and thou hast delivered thy soul.
        XXXIII.                EZEKIEL.
    Ch.
    10    Now son of man, say to the house of Israel, Thus have
       you spoken, saying, Our errors and our iniquities are upon
    11 us ; and in them we are pining away ; how then can we live ?
       Say unto them, As I live, saith the Lord, I desire not the death
       of the wicked, but that the wicked should turn from his way
       and live.  Turn ye, turn ye from your way.   Why do you die,
          house of Israel.
    12     Say to the children of thy people, The righteousness of a
       righteous man will not save him on the day when he goeth
       astray.  Nor shall the iniquity of a wicked man bring ruin on
       him, on the day when he turneth away from his iniquity.
           (a) What ! cannot a righteous man be saved.
    13     (b) When I have spoken to the righteous, if he, trusting
        to his righteousness, shall commit iniquity, none of his righte-
       ous acts shall be remembered ; for the iniquity which he hath
    14 done, even for it he shall die.And when I say to the wicked,
    15 Thou shalt die : if he turn from his sin and execute judg-
        ment and justice and restore a pledge and make compensation
        for acts of rapine and walk in the statutes of life without
    16 committing injustice, he shall live and not die.  None of his
        sins which he committed shall be remembered.      Because he
        hath executed judgment and justice, for this he shall live.
    17     Now will the children of thy people say, The way of the
     18 Lord is not straight ?It is their own way which is not straight.
        When a righteous man turneth away from his righteousness
     19 and shall commit iniquities, for them he shall die.And when
        the sinner turneth away from his iniquity and shall execute
     20 judgment and justice, for them he shall live.Yet this is what
        gave occasion to your saying, The way of the Lord is not
        straight. I will judge you,    house of Israel, every one ac-
        cording to his ways.
     21   XVI. NOWit came to pass in the twelfth year of our cap-
        tivity, in the twelfth month, on the fifth of the month, that one
        who had escaped from Jerusalem came to me and said, The
     22 city is taken. Now the hand of the Lord had been upon me
                     (a) An objection,(b) The answer.
                                                                                                                                :
              Ch. XXXIV.                                     EZEKIEL.
                    the evening before he arrived, and had opened rny mouth.                                                 So
                    when he came to me in the morning my mouth was opened
              23 and no more shut.                     And a word of the Lord came to me, say-
              24 ing, Son of man, they who dwell in the waste places in the
                    land of Israel, say, Abraham was a single person, yet he had
                    this land, now we are many ; to us this land is given for a pos-
              25 session.           Therefore say to them, Thus saith the Lord, Lord,
                    As I live, they who dwell in the wastes shall fall by the sword ;
                    and they in the open country shall be delivered to the wild
                    beasts of the field for food : and those in walled towns and
               28 those in caves I will destroy with pestilence and I will make
                    the land a desert.                 And the pride of its strength shall be de-
                    stroyed, and the mountains of Israel shall be desolate by rea-
                    son of none passing through it.                            And they shall know that I
               29 am the Lord.                For I will make their land a desert and it shall
                    be wasted, because of all their abominations which they have
                    committed.
               30          Now son of man, with regard to these children of thy peo-
                    ple who speak of thee by the walls and in the porches of their
                     houses, they indeed speak to one another, saying, " Let us as-
               31 semble and hear what come from the Lord."                                              They come to
                    thee as people assemble ; and they sit before thee and hear
                     thy words, but will not do them, because there is a lie in their
               32 mouth, and their heart goeth after their pollutions ; therefore
                    thou art to them like the sound of a tuneful psaltery : they
               33 will hear thy words, but will not do them: but when they
                     come to pass they will say, " Lo ! they are come ! "                                        And they
                     will know that there was a prophet among them.
               XXXIV. XVII. AGAIN a word of the Lord came to me,
                    saying, Son of man, prophesy against the shepherds of Israel
                     prophesy and say to the shepherds, Thus saith the Lord, Lord,
                         Shepherds of Israel ! Do shepherds feed themselves ? Do not
                 3 the shepherds feed their flocks ?                            Behold you devour the milk
                     and clothe yourselves with the fleeces, and that which is fat
                 4 you slaughter ; but my flock you do not feed.                                         You have not
                     strengthened the weak, nor cured the diseased.                                    That which was
                     bruised you have not bound up, nor brought back that which
                    was going astray ; nor have you searched for that which was
                                                                                                                        !;;
      Ch. XXXIY.                                      EZEKIEL.
        5 lost : but you have wearied out the strong with toil, so that my
           flock is dispersed for want of shepherds, and is become a prey
        6 to all the wild beasts of the field.                            On every mountain and on
            every high hill my sheep are scattered, and dispersed over the
            face of the earth ; and there is none who seeketh or bringeth
        7 them back.               Therefore,             shepherds, hear a word of the Lord
        8 As I live, saith the Lord, Because my flock is become a prey,
           and my sheep are become meat for all the wild beasts of the
            field,    beyond what they would be were there no shepherds
            and the shepherds have not looked out for my sheep, and the
            shepherds have fed themselves and have not tended my sheep
        9 Therefore,                 shepherds, thus saith the Lord, Lord, behold I
      10 am against the shepherds ; and I will exact my sheep out of
            their hands, and discharge them from feeding my sheep : and
            these shepherds shall no longer feed them.                                      I will rescue my
            sheep out of their mouth, that they may be no longer food for
      11 them.           For thus saith the Lord, Lord, Lo ! I myself will seek
      12 my sheep and watch over them.                                  As a shepherd searcheth for
           his flock when mist and murky air overspread his scattered
           sheep : so will I diligently seek my sheep, and bring them from
            every place, where they have been dispersed in the day of mist
      13 and murky darkness.                       And I will lead them out from among
            the nations, and gather them from the countries, and bring
           them into their own land, and feed them on the mountains of
           Israel, and in the vales and in all the habitable part of the land.
      14 I will feed them in good pasture.                                  On the lofty mountain of
            Israel shall be their folds ; there they shall lie down and rest there
            in luxurious ease, and be fed in a rich pasture on the moun-
      15 tains of Israel.               I myself will feed my sheep and I myself will
           give them repose, and they shall know that I am the Lord.
      16         Thus saith the Lord, Lord, I will seek the lost, and bring
            back the stray ; and bind up the bruised and strengthen the
           weak : and I will watch the strong, and feed them with judg-
      17 ment.            And as for you sheep, thus saith the Lord, Lord,
           Behold I will judge between sheep and sheep ; rams and he
      18 goats.          Was it not enough for you, that you fed in a rich pas-
           ture, but you must tread down the leavings of your pasture
           with your feet ?              Or that you have drunk of the standing water,
     19 but you must trouble the residue with your feet ?                                            So that my
                                                                         —;
         Cb. XXXV.                   EZEKTEL.
             sheep fed on the tramplings of your feet, and drank the water
         20 which your feet had muddied.     Therefore thus saith the Lord,
             Lord, Behold I will judge between the strong sheep and the
         21 weak.   You have pushed with your sides and your shoulders,
         22 and have butted with your horns and bruised all the weak : but
             I will save my sheep and they shall no more be for a prey
         23 and I will judge between ram and ram.    And I will set up over
             them one shepherd who shall feed them, even my servant Da-
         24 vid, who shall be their shepherd : and I the Lord will be their
             God ; and David shall be chief among them.    I the Lord have
         25 spoken ; and with this David I will make a covenant of peace,
             and remove the wild beasts entirely out of the land; so that
         26 they may dwell in the desert and sleep in the woods.     And I
             will place them around my mountain, and give them the rain
         27 the rain of blessing : and the trees of the plain shall yield their
             fruit ; and the earth shall yield its increase ; and they shall dwell
             in their land securely ; And know that I am the Lord, when I
             have broken their yoke : and I will rescue them out of the hand
         28 of them who enslaved them, and they shall no more be a prey
             to the nations, nor shall the wild beasts of the earth any more
             devour them, so they shall dwell secure and none shall make
         29 them afraid.   I will indeed raise up for them a plant of peace,
             and they shall no more be consumed with famine in the land ;
         30 nor shall they any more bear the revile of nations ; and they shall
             know that I am the Lord their God, and that they are my peo-
             ple.     house of Israel, saith the Lord, Lord, you are my
             sheep, even the sheep of my flock, and I, the Lord, am your
             God, saith the Lord, Lord.
         XXXV.        XVIII.    AGAIN a word of the Lord came to me,
             saying, Son of man, set thy face against the mountain of Seir,
           3 and prophesy against it and say to it, Thus saith the Lord,
             Lord, Behold I am against thee, mountain of Seir ; and I will
             stretch forth my hand against thee, and make thee a desert and
           4 thou shalt be desolate. And I will make a devastation among
             thy cities, and thou shalt be a desert and shalt know that I am
           5 the Lord.  Because thou hast been a perpetual enemy and didst
             deceitfully lie in wait for the house of Israel—hast been a sword
             in the hand of enemies, in the time of revolt, in their last ex-
                                                                                                              ;
      Ck. XXXVI.                                 EZEKIEL.
       6 treniities ;        therefore as I live, saitli the Lord, Lord, as thou
       7 hast sinned unto blood, blood shall pursue thee.                                    And I will
           make the mountain of Seir an entire desert ; and I will destroy
       8 from it men and cattle, and fill with the wounded thy hills and
           thyvallies : and in all thy plains, the victims ofthe sword shall fall
       9 in thee.         I will make thee a perpetual desolation, and thy cities
           shall no more be inhabited, and thou shalt know that I am the
      10 Lord.         Because thou saidst, " The two nations and the two
           countries shall be mine, and I will possess them, though the
     11 Lord is there."              Therefore, as I live saith the Lord, I will deal
           with thee according to thine enmity, and be made known to
           thee, when I judge thee ; and thou shalt know that I am the
      12 Lord.         I have heard the sound of thy revilings ; because thou
           saidst, " The waste mountains of Israel are given us to be de-
      13 voured," and diclst utter swelling words against me with thy
      14 mouth : I heard them : therefore thus saith the Lord, to the joy
      15 of the whole land I will make thee a desert.                                   Thou mountain
           of Seir shalt be a desert ; and all Idumea shall be destroyed ;
           and thou shalt know that I the Lord am their God.
     XXXVI.                And thou son of man, prophesy concerning the
           mountains of Israel, and say to the mountains of Israel, Hear
       2 a word of the Lord ; Thus saith the Lord, Lord ; For as much
           as against you the enemy said, "Aha ! these everlasting deserts
       3 are become our possession ; " therefore prophesy and say, Thus
           saith the Lord, Lord, For as much as you have been despised
           and hated by them around you, by reason of your being a
           possession for the relics of nations ; and you are become a by-
       4 word and scoff to the nations : therefore,                               mountains of Isra-
           el, hear a word of the Lord, Thus saith the Lord, to the moun-
           tains and the hills, and to the brooks and vallies, even to the
           waste and desolate places, and to the cities which have been ut-
           terly forsaken ; as they are become a prey and a haunt for the
       5 remnants of nations around ; Therefore thus saith the Lord,
           Lord, In the fire of my wrath I have spoken against these rem-
           nants of nations and against all Idumea : Because they have with
           joy distributed this land of mine among themselves for a pos-
           session, undervaluing lives that you might be a waste for prey
       6 therefore prophesy concerning the land of Israel and say to the
           mountains and hills and to the vales and forests, Thus saith the
                      XXXVI.                                   EZEKIEL.
               Ch.
                 7 Lord, Behold in my zeal and my wrath I have spoken ; for as
                     much as you have borne the reproach of the nations ; therefore
                     I will lift up my hand against the nations around you ; they
                 8 shall bear their own dishonour : but your grapes and your
                     fruits,        mountains of Israel, shall be eaten by my people.                                      Be-
                 9 cause they have confident hopes of coming—because, lo ! I
                     am over you, and I will watch over you ; therefore you shall
               10 be cultivated and sown: and upon you I will multiply men
                     even the whole house of Israel ; and the cities shall be rebuilt
               11 and the wastes inhabited: and upon you I will multiply men
                     and cattle, and cause you to be inhabited as in your former
                     state.      And I will deal kindly with you as I did in times of
               12 old         and you shall know that I am the Lord.                                 And I will cause
                           ;
                     men, my people Israel, to increase upon you ; and they shall in-
                     herit you, and you shall be a possession for them, and shall no
                     more be without a succession of children from them.
               13          Thus saith the Lord, Lord, For as much as they said of
                     thee, " Thou art a devourer of men, and art bereft of thy na-
               14 tion," Therefore thou shalt no more devour men nor make thy
               15 nation childless, saith the Lord, Lord.                                   And the revile of na-
                     tions shall no more be heard against you, nor shall you any
                     more bear the reproaches of peoples, saith the Lord, Lord.
               16          Again a word of the Lord came to me, saying, Son of man,
               17 when the house of Israel dwelt in their land, they polluted it
                     with their way and with their idols and with their impurities ; and
                     their way was in my view as the uncleanness of a woman in
               18 a state of separation ; therefore I poured out my wrath against
               19 them, and scattered them through the nations, and dispersed
                     them through the countries : according to their way and accord-
               20 ing to their sin I judged them.                            And when they went to the na-
                     tions, wherever they went they profaned my holy name, by say-
                     ing that they were the people of the Lord and had come from
                21 his land; and that I had spared them for the sake of that holyname
                      of mine, which they, the house of Israel, profaned among the
                22 nations wherever they went.                              Therefore say to the house of
                      Israel, Thus saith the Lord, I deal thus with you, not for your
                      sakes,           house of Israel, but only for the sake of my holy
                      name, which you have profaned among the nations wherever
                23 you went.             For I will hallow my great name which hath been
       Ch. XXXVI.                                                 EZEKIEL.
              profaned, which you have profaned in the midst of them                                                                         and
                                                                                                                                          ;
              the nations shall know that I am the Lord, when I am hallow-
       24 ed by you before their eyes.                                        When I take you from among the
              nations, and gather you out of all the countries, and bring
       25 you into your own land ; then I will sprinkle upon you pure
              water, and you shall be cleansed from all iyour impurities and
       26 from all your idols ;                                 and when I have cleansed you, I will
              give you a new heart and put a new spirit in you : I will take
              away the stony heart out of your flesh, and give you a heart of
       27 flesh : And I will put my spirit in you, and cause you to walk
               in my statutes, and to keep my judgments and practise them.
       28 And you shall dwell in the land which I gave to your fathers;
       29 and you shall be my people and I will be your God.                                                                   And I will
               save you from all your impurities.                                              And I will call for corn
       30 and multiply it : and no more send famine among you.                                                                          And I
               will multiply the fruit of the trees and the products of the field
                                                                                                                                                    ;
              that you may no more bear the reproach of famine among the
       31 nations.                   Then will you call to remembrance your evil ways,
              and your devices which were not good ; and in their sight be
       32 grieved for your iniquities and your abominations.                                                                      It is not
               for your sakes that I do this, saith the Lord, Lord.                                                               This you
               must needs know.                            Blush and be ashamed for your ways, O
               house of Israel.
        33            Thus saith Adonai the Lord, when I have cleansed you
               from all your iniquities, I will cause your cities to be rebuilded
        34 and the desolate places shall be inhabited, and the land which
               was a waste shall be tilled.                                   For as much as it was a waste in
        35 the sight of all who passed by ; therefore they will say, " This
               land which was a waste is become like a paradise, and the
               waste, ruined and demolished cities are become places of
        36 strength " and the nations which may be left
                                  ;                                                                               around you shall
               know, that I the Lord have rebuilt the ruined cities, and plant-
               ed the grounds which were a waste.                                                 I the Lord have spoken
        37 and I will perform.                             Thus saith Adonai the Lord, Still that they
        38 may do this, the house of Israel must seek me.—I will multi-
               ply them like a flock, the men like holy flocks, like the flocks
               of Jerusalem at her festivals.                                    So shall the wasted cities be fill-
               ed with flocks of men, and they shall know that I am the
               Lord.
                      VOL. II.                                              4 F
            XXXVII.             EZEKIEL.
        Ch.
        XXXVII.      Then the hand of the Lord came upon me.Andthe
           Lord led me out in spirit and set me in the midst of a plain
         2 which was full of human bones.And he led me all around
           them. And lo ! there was an immense quantity on the surface
         3 of the plain, and they were very dry.And he said to me, Son
           of man, shall these bones revive ?Whereupon I said, Lord,
           Lord, thou knowest such things.
         4    Then he said to me, Prophesy concerning these bones
           and say to them, Ye bones which are dry, hear a word of the
         5 Lord, Thus saith the Lord to these bones, Behold I will
         6 bring upon you a breath of life ; and upon you I will lay si-
           news ; and I will bring flesh on you and stretch skin over you,
           and put my breath in you and you shall live : and you shall
           know, that I am the Lord.
         7    So I prophesied as he commanded me, and it came to
           pass that, when I had prophesied, behold there was a tremu-
           lous motion and it brought the bones together, every one to
         8 its proper place.And I beheld and lo ! sinews and flesh were
           grown upon them, and skin covered them, but there was no
           breath in them.
         3    Then he said to me, Prophesy to the wind.Prophesy, Son
           of man and say to the wind, Thus saith the Lord, From the
           four winds, come and blow on these dead and let them live.
        10 So I prophesied as he commanded me, and breath came into
           them and they became alive and stood on their feet, an ex-
           ceeding great multitude.
        11    Then the Lord spoke to me saying, Son of man, these
           bones are the whole house of Israel.Now they say, "Our
           bones are become dry. Our hope is gone.We are wasted to
        12 a shadow." Therefore prophesy and say, Thus saith the Lord,
           Behold I will open your graves ; and bring you up out of
           your tombs and bring you into the land of Israel, and you shall
           know that I am the Lord.
        13    When I have opened your graves that I may bring up my
           people out of the graves I will then put my breath in you and
           you shall live.xVnd I will settle you in your own land ; and
           you shall know that I am the Lord.I have spoken and I will
           perform, saith the Lord.
        XXXVII.              EZEKIEL.
   Ch.
   15     Then a word of the Lord came to me saying, Son of
       man, take thee a staff and write thereon, "Juda and the chil-
    16 dren of Israel who adhere to him" Then thou shalt take
       thee another staff and write thereon, "For Joseph the staff
       of Ephraim and all the children of Israel tvlto adhere to him"
   17 Then thou shalt join them one to the other to be bound
       together into one staff for thee, and they shall be in thy hand.
   18 And when the children of thy people say to thee, Why dost
   19 thou not tell us, what thou meanest by these?    Then thou
       shalt say to them, Thus saith the Lord, Behold I will take the
       tribe of Joseph which is administered by Ephraim and the tribes
       of Israel which adhere to him, and add them to the tribe of
   20 Juda, and they shall be one sceptre in the hand of Juda. And
       while the staves on which thou hast written shall be in thy
   21 hand before them, thou shalt say to them, Thus saith the
       Lord, Lord, Behold I will take the whole house of Israel from
       among the nations, whither they went ; and I will gather them
       from all those around them, and bring them to the land of
   22 Israel, and make them a nation in my land even on the moun-
       tains of Israel.And there shall be one chief over them. And
       they shall no more be two nations ; nor shall they any more
       be split into two kingdoms, that they may no more be pol-
    23 luted with their idols.And I will deliver them from all their
       iniquities and purify them from all their sins which they have
       committed.  And they shall be my people, and I the Lord will
    24 be their God.  And my servant David shall be chief among
       them.  He shall be singly the shepherd of all.Because they
       will walk in my statutes, and keep my judgments, and prac-
    25 tise them, therefore they shall dwell in that land of theirs
       which I gave to my servant Jacob. Where their fathers dwelt
       there they shall dwell and my servant David shall be the only
    26 chief forever.And I will make a covenant of peace with them.
       It shall be an everlasting covenant with them.  And I will
    27 place my sanctuary in the midst of them forever.   And my
       habitation shall be among them ; and I will be their God and
    28 they shall be my people. And the nations shall know that I
       am the Lord who sanctifieth them, by my sanctuary being in
       the midst of them forever.
                                                                                —
         Ch. XXXVIII.                  EZEKIEL.
         XXXVIII.         XIX.      AGAIN a word of the Lord came to
             rne, saying, Son of man, set thy face against Gog, and the land
             of Magog, the prince of Eos, Mesoch and Thobel and pro-
             phesy against him and say to him,
          3      Thus saith the Lord, Lord, Behold I am against thee,
          4 prince of Kos, Mesoch and Thobel.           And I will gather thee
             and all thine army, horses and horsemen all clad with coats of
             mail—a great assembly with shields and helmets and swords,
          5 Persians and Ethiopians and Libyans, all armed with helmets
          6 and shields; Gomer and all those around him, the house of
             Thogarmar, from the extreme north, with all around him and
          7 many nations with thee.      Be prepared and make thyself ready,
             thou and thy multitude assembled with thee ; for thou shalt be to
          8 me for a vanguard.     After many days he will be in a state of pre-
             paration, and in the last of years he will begin his march, and
             come into the land which is withdrawn from the sword—the
             land of them who have been collected from many nations, to
             the land of Israel, which had been made an entire desert.
             When he from nations hath begun his march, they will be
           9 all dwelling in peace.    Then thou wilt come up like rain, and
             advance like a cloud to cover the land.        When thou shalt be
         10 with all thy bands around thee, and many nations with thee;
             (Thus saith the Lord, Lord,) In that day things will come
             into thy heart, and thou wilt form wicked devices and say,
         11 "I will go up against an abject land: I shall come upon them
             who are living at ease, and dwelling in peaceful security—all
             inhabiting a land in which there is not a walled town, and who
         12 have neither bars nor gates ; to take prey and to gather their
             spoils, by turning my hand against this wasted country which
             is re-settled, and against a nation gathered together from many
             nations who have gotten wealth and inhabit the navel of the
             earth."
          13     Saba and Daidan and the merchants of Carthage, and all
             their colonies, will say to thee, Thou art coming for prey,
             just to collect plunder and spoil : thou hast assembled thy
             troops to take silver and gold, to carry off cattle, to gather the
          14 spoil.   Therefore prophesy Son of man and say to Gog, Thus
             saith the Lord, At the time when my people Israel shall be
          15 dwelling in peace, wilt thou not be roused ?         Yes ; thou wilt
                                                                    —;;:
    Ch. XXXIX.                 EZEKIEL.
       come from thy place, from the extremity of the north : thou
       and many nations with thee, all mounted on horses, a great
    16 assembly, and a mighty army, will indeed come up against
       my people Israel, as a cloud to cover the land : in the latter
       days I will bring thee up against my land, that all the na-
       tions may know me when I am hallowed by thee in their
       sight,—
    17    Thus saith the Lord, Lord, to Gog, Thou art he of whom
       I have spoken in former times, by the ministry of my servants
       the prophets of Israel, that in these days and years I would
    18 bring thee up against them. But it shall come to pass on that
       day, on the day when Gog shall come against the land of
       Israel, my wrath shall come up, saith the Lord, Lord, and my
    19 zeal.  In the fire of mine indignation, I have spoken, there
       shall indeed be on that day a great shock in the land of Israel.
    20 At the presence of the Lord, the fishes of the sea shall be sha-
       ken, and the birds of the air, and the beasts of the field, and
       all the reptiles which creep on the earth, and all the men on
       the face of the earth. And the mountains shall be rent to pieces,
       and the vallies shall sink down, and every wall shall fall to
    21 the ground.   And for all this indeed I will call up terror saith
       the Lord : every man's sword shall be against his brother.
    22 And I will execute judgment on him, with pestilence and
       blood and with tempests of rain and hailstones; and I will
       rain down fire and brimstone on him, and on all with him,
       even on the many nations with him.      And I shall be magni-
    23 fied and hallowed and glorified ; and made known in the
       sight of many nations, and they shall know that I am the Lord.
    XXXIX.        Thou therefore son of man, prophesy against Gog
       and say, Thus saith the Lord, Lord, Behold I am against thee,
     2 Gog, the prince of Kos, Mesoch and Thobel, and I will as-
       semble thee and lead thee and cause thee to come from the
       farthest north, and bring thee up to the mountains of Israel
     o and I will destroy thy bow from thy left hand and thine arrows
       from thy right ; and overthrow thee on the mountains of Israel
     4 and thou and all who are around thee shall fall ; and the nations
       with thee shall be given to multitudes of birds, to all the
     5 feathered tribe, and to all the wild beasts of the field I have
       given thee to be devoured.   On the open field thou shalt fall
                                                                                                                      ;
                    XXXIX.                               EZEKIEL.
             Ch.
               6 for I have spoken, saith the Lord.                            I will indeed send a fire
                  against Gog and the isles shall be peaceably inhabited, and
               7 they shall know that I am the Lord.                            And my holy name shall
                   be known in the midst of my people Israel ; and my name
                   which is holy shall no more be profaned ; and the nations shall
               8 know that I am the Lord, the Holy One of Israel.                                    Behold it is
                   coming and thou shalt know that it will be, saith the Lord,
               9 Lord ; this is the day of which I have spoken, when they who
                   inhabit the cities of Israel shall come forth, and make fires with
                   the arms—with the shields and spears, and with bows and ar-
                   rows, and hand-staves and poles—even with these they shall make
             10 fires seven years: so that they shall not have occasion to take
                   wood from the plains, nor to cut timber from the forests; but
                   shall burn the arms only. And they shall plunder their plunder-
             11 ers; and spoil those who spoiled them, saith the Lord.                                          And
                   on that day I will give Gog a noted place—a burying place in
                   Israel, the grave yard of strangers by the sea shore : and the
                   slope of the valley shall be enclosed with a wall; and there
                   Gog and all his multitude shall be buried ; and it shall then be
              12 called the grave yard of Gog.                      For the house of Israel will bury
             13 them, that the land may be cleansed.                            During seven months the
                   people of the land will be employed in burying them; and it
                   shall be to them a memorable epoch, " The day when he was
              14 glorified" saith the Lord.                  Then they will send men every where
                   to traverse the land, and bury them who are left on the face of
                   the ground, in order to purify it after the seven months.                                     And
              15 they will make diligent search.                        And every one who traverseth
                   the land, upon seeing a human bone, shall set up a mark near it
              16 till the buriers bury it at Gai, the grave yard of Gog : (for the
                   name of that city shall be called Grave Yard) thus shall the
                   land be cleansed.
              17        Thou, therefore, son of man, say, Thus saith the Lord, Say
                   to every winged bird, and to all the wild beasts of the field,
                   Assemble and come : assemble from all around to my sa-
                   crifice, to the great sacrifice which I have made for you on
                   the mountains of Israel; and you shall eat flesh and drink
              18 blood.         You shall eat the flesh of giants and drink the blood of
                   the princes of the earth.                Earns and young bulls and he goats ;
              19 and all the bulls are well fatted. And you shall eat fat till you
                                    EZEKIEL.
    Ch. XL.
        are glutted, and drink blood to satiety, at rny sacrifice which I
    20 have prepared for you.      And you shall be filled at my table with
        horses and horsemen, and with giants and every great war-
    21 rior, saith the Lord.     I will indeed display my glory among you,
        and all the nations shall see my judgment which I have exe-
    22 cuted, and my hand which I have brought upon them.                   And
        the house of Israel shall know that I am the Lord their God
    23 from this particular time and thence forward.           And all the na-
        tions shall know, that the house of Israel were carried into
        captivity for their sins.    Because they broke covenant with me
        therefore I turned away my face from them, and delivered
        them into the hands of their enemies, and they all fell by the
    24 sword.    According to their pollutions and according to their
        iniquities I dealt with them and turned away my face from
    25 them.     Therefore thus saith the Lord, I will now bring back
        the captivity of Jacob, and have compassion on the house of
    26 Israel.    And I will shew a zeal for my holy name, when they
        shall have suffered disgrace, for the rebellion of which they
    27 were guilty, when they dwelt peaceably in their own land.            And
        there shall be none to make them afraid, when I have brought
        them back from among the nations and gathered them from
    28 the countries of the nations.      So I shall be hallowed by them in
        the sight of the nations and they shall know that I the Lord
        am their God, when I manifest myself to them among the na-
    21) tions.   And I will no more turn away my face from them, for
        as much as I have poured out my wrath on the house of Is-
        rael, saith the Lord, Lord.
    XL. XX. IN the five and twentieth year of our captivity, in
        the first month, on the tenth day of the month ; the fourteenth
      2 year after the city was taken ; on that day the hand of the Lord
        came upon me and in a vision of God brought me to the land
        of Israel and set me on a very high mountain, on which there
      3 was a building before me resembling a city.            And he led me
        thither.   And lo ! a man, whose appearance resembled that of
        sparkling brass ; and in his hand a builder's line and a measur-
        ing reed.    And he stood at the gate.      And the man whom I saw
        said to me, Son of man, Behold with thine eyes and hear with
        thine ears, and lay up in thy heart all that I shew thee ; for thou
                                                                                                                      ;
                     XL.                                 EZEKIEL.
              Ch.
                   art come hither that I may shew thee and that thou mayst point
                   out to the house of Israel all that thou seest.
                5        Now behold there was a wall on the outside of the house
                   all around ; and the man had in his hand a reed of six cubits
                   long by the cubit and hand breadth, so he measured the outer
                6 wall.       The breadth equalled the reed and its height was equal
                   to the reed.          Then he went up by seven steps to the gate front-
                7 ing the east and measured the ailam of the gate which was
                   one reed broad ; and the Thee was a reed long and a reed broad
                    —and the ailam between the Theelath was six cubits.                                   And the
                8 second Thee was a reed long and a reed broad and the ailam was
                   five cubits ; and the third Thee was a reed long and a reed
                9 broad.        And the ailam of the gateway adjoining the ailam of the
              10 gate was eight cubits, and the aileus were two cubits.                                         And
                    with regard to the aliems of the gate on the inside and the
                    Thees of the gate ; the Thees were opposite to those without
                   three on one side of the gate and three on the other, all of the
              11 same measure on this side and on that.                            And the ailams on both
                   sides were of the same measure.                      Then he measured the breadth
              12 of the door of the gateway ten cubits.                            But the breadth of the
                    gateway was thirteen cubits comprehending a border of a cu-
                    bit on each side up to the face of the Thees : and the Thees on
              13 each side were six cubits.                      Then he measured the gate from
                    the outer wall of one Thee to the outer wall of the other Thee
              14 twenty five cubits.                This was gate upon gate.                     And the open
                    part of the ailam of the gate on the outside was twenty cubits,
              15 the theims of the gate being round about; and including this
                    vestibule of the gate on the outside and the vestibule of the
              16 gate on the inside the extent was fifty cubits.                               And all around
                    there were windows wide inwards and narrow outwards, for
                    the theims and the inner ailams of this gate of the court : and
                    on the windows for the ailams on the inside and on the ailams
              17 there were palm trees on this side and that.                                 Then he led me
                    to the court within ; and lo ! here were houses for those em-
                    ployed in the holy service and ranges of columns all around
               18 the court ; there were thirty houses in the peristyles or ranges
                    of columns and the porticos were behind the gate; the lower
                    row of columns being on a range with the gates.
                                   EZEKIEL.
    Oh. XL.
    19      Then he measured the breadth of this court from the in-
        ner vestibule of the outer gate to the outer vestibule of a gate
    20 facing the east, one hundred cubits.         Then he led me north-
        ward, and lo !   there was a gate to this outer court facing the
        north, and he measured it, both the length and the breadth ;
    21 and the Thees three on each side and the aileus and the ailam-
        mons and its palm trees.        And the measures were the same
        as those of the gate facing the east.      Its length was fifty cubits
    22 and its breadth twenty five cubits.         And its windows and the
        ailammons and its palm trees were the same as those of the
        eastern gate and the ascent to it was by seven steps.          But the
    23 ailammons were on the inside.          And there was a gate to the
        inner court facing this northern gate in the same manner as the
        other did that to the east.       And he measured the court from
        gate to gate, one hundred cubits.
    24      Then he led me southward, and lo ! there was a gate
        facing the south, and he measured it, and the Thees and the
        aileus and the ailammons : and the measures were the same as
    25 those mentioned.       And its windows and the ailammons around
        were the same as the windows of that other ailam.           Its length
    26 was fifty cubits and its breadth twenty five cubits.            And it
        had seven steps and an ailammon on the inside.             It had also
    27 palm trees on each side over the aileus.       And this gate was di-
        rectly opposite to the south gate of the inner court ; and he
        measured the court from gate to gate and the breadth on the
        south side was a hundred cubits.
    28      Then he led me to the inner court of the gate facing the
        south, and he measured that gate, and its dimensions were the
    29 same as those mentioned, and its Thees and its aileus and its
        ailammons were of the like dimensions.          And there were win-
    31 dows to it and to the ailammon round about.             Its length was
        fifty cubits and the breadth of its ailam on the outer court was
        twenty five cubits, and there were palm trees over the aileus
       and it had eight steps.
    32     Then he led me to the gate facing the east, and measured
    33 it according to the same measures.       And its Thees and its aileus
       and its ailammons were of the measures above mentioned and
       it had windows and an ailammon round about.            Its length was
    34 fifty cubits and its breadth twenty five cubits.       And its ailam-
           VOL. II.                   4 G
        Ch. XL.                     EZEKIEL.
            mon was on the inner court, and there were palm trees over
            the aileu on each side. And there were eight steps up to it.
         35     Then he led me to the north gate and measured it accord-
         36 ing to the same measures.   And it had its Thees and its aileus
            and its ailammons and its windows around it, and an ailam-
            mon peculiar to it.  Its length was fifty cubits, and its breadth
         37 twenty five cubits.   And its ailammons were on the outer
            court, and there were palm trees to the aileu, on each side and
         38 eight steps up to it.   Its houses for the priests, and its doors
            and its ailammon were at the second gate.         At this gate
         39 facing the north there was a common sewer, that they might
         40 there kill the sin offerings and the trespass offerings.And be-
            hind the sewer of the burnt offerings there were at this gate
            facing the north, two tables facing the east. Also back of the
            second gate, and of the ailam of the gate were two tables on
         41 the east side.  There were four on one side, and four on the
            other, back of this gate.  Upon these they slay the burnt offer-
            ings.  And over against these eight tables for the burnt offer-
         42 ings, there were four tables of hewn stone for the whole burnt
            offerings. The breadth of these was a cubit and a half, and
            the length two cubits and a half, and the height one cubit.  On
            these are to be laid the instruments with which they kill the
         43 whole burnt offerings and the sacrifices.   They have therefore
            each of them a border of a hand breadth hewn on the inside
            all around ; and over these tables there is a covering to defend
            them from the rain, and the heat of the sun.
         44     Then he led me into the inner court ; and lo ! there were
             two apartments on the inner court ; one behind the north gate
             facing the south ; and one behind the south gate facing the
         45 north.   And he said to me, This apartment which faceth the
             south is for the priests, who keep the watch of the house,
         46 and that apartment facing the north is for the priests who have
             the charge of the altar, namely the sons of Sadduk, the only
         47 Levites who come near to the Lord to minister to him.      Then
             he measured this court which was a hundred cubits long and
             a hundred cubits broad, being four square.  And the altar was
             on one side in front of the house.
         48     Then he led me to the ailam of the house and measured
             the ail of the ailam, five cubits the breadth on each side and
                                                                —
        XLI.                  EZEKIEL.
    Ch.
       the width of the gateway was fourteen cubits ; and the cheeks
       of the door of the ailam were three cubits on the one side and
    49 three cubits on the other. And the length of the ailam was
       twenty cubits and the breadth twelve cubits ; and the ascent
       up to it was by ten steps.And there were pillars on the ailam,
       one on the one side and one on the other.
    XLI.     Then he led me into the temple, and having measured the
     2 ailam to it, which was six cubits broad on each side, and the
       breadth of the gateway was ten cubits, and the cheeks of the
       gateway five cubits on the one side, and five on the other, he
       measured the length of the temple forty cubits, and the breadth
     3 was twenty cubits.  Now when he came to the inner apart-
       ment he measured the ail of the door two cubits, and the door
       six cubits, and the cheeks of the door seven cubits on each
     4 side. And he measured the length of the doors forty cubits,
       and the breadth twenty cubits, commensurate with the front
     5 of the temple. And he said, This is the Holy of Holies.Then
       he measured the wall of the house, six cubits, and the breadth
       of the gallery four cubits all around.And the galleries were
     6 three times thirty ; one gallery over another twice.And there
       was a ledge in the wall of the house for the galleries all around
       to rest on, so as not to be fastened into the walls of the house,
     7 and consequently this ledge of the house being added to the
       upper gallery, all around the width of the upper gallery was
       enlarged, by an additional breadth equal to this ledge as one
       ascended from the lowermost to the second story, and from
     8 the second to the third story. And the thrael of the house
        —the top of the galleries around, including the ledges, was
     9 a platform equal to the reed of six cubits. And the breadth
        of the wall on the out side of the gallery, was five cubits.
     10 And the vacancies between the galleries of the house, and
        the chambers were in breadth twenty cubits, including the
     11 circumambient wall around the house.  And the doors of the
        chambers were on the vacancy on the one side of the house
        facing the north, and on the other side of the house facing the
        south. Now the vacancy for lighting the house was five cu-
        bits all around.And the partition wall in front of this vacancy
        was towards the west, seventy cubits broad ; its thickness all
        around being five cubits ; and its length was ninety cubits.
          Ch. XLII.                     EZEKIEL.
          13 And he measured over against the house a length of a hundred
             cubits.   Now the vacancies and the partitions and their walls
          14 were a hundred cubits.     And the breadth in front of the house
          15 including the vacancies on the sides was a hundred cubits.       And
             he measured the length of the partition wall over against the
             vacancy behind the house, and the length of it including the
             vacancies on each side, was a hundred cubits.
          16     Now the temple and the corners, and the outer ailam were
             arched ;   and the windows, the apertures for light through
             which they looked out from the three stories round about, were
             netted, and the parts adjoining were planked, both the floor and
             from the floor to the windows.     And the windows in the three
             stories, had shutters which folded back, to give an opportunity
          17 of looking out at them.    And near to the inner, and quite to the
          18 outer door, there were sculptured, on the whole wall round
             about, both within and without, cherubims and palm trees be-
          19 tween cherub and cherub.       Every cherub had two faces, a face
             of a man towards the palm tree on one side and the face of a lion
             towards the palm tree on the other side.      The house was sculp-
          20 tured all around.   From the floor to the vaulted cieling there were
         21 cherubim and palm trees sculptured.          And the sanctuary and
         22 the open temple were squares.         In front of the Holies there
             was an appearance like that of an altar of wood.       The height of
             it was three cubits, and the length two cubits, and the breadth
             two cubits.   And it had horns.     And its base and its sides were
             of wood.   And he said to me, This is the table which is in the
         23 presence of the Lord.       And the temple had two doors, and the
         24 sanctuary had two doors.      And these pairs of doors which folded
         25 back had two leaves a piece.      And on these there was sculpture.
             Even upon the doors of the temple there were cherubim and
             palm trees like the sculpture of the Holies.        And there were
         26 large beams on the front of the outer ailam, and windows nar-
             row without and wide inwards.
         XLII.       Now when he had measured on this side and that to the
             cieling of the ailam and to the galleries adjoining the house,
             he then led me into the inner court on the east, conducting me
           2 towards the north gate.    And lo ! there were five chambers adjoin-
             ing the vacancy and the north partition wall, in length fronting
                              EZEKIEL.
    Ch. XLII.
     3 the north one hundred cubits and in breadth fifty cubits, sculp-
       tured in the same manner as the gates of the inner court and set
       off in the same manner as the peristyles of the outer court with
     4 a triple range of piazzas in front of the house.  And over
       against the chambers was a walk ten cubits broad and a hun-
     5 dred cubits long and their doors were towards the north.And
       in like manner there were walks for the upper stories.For the
       upper piazza was taken from the building and out of that
       which was a piazza below was made a platform.   So there was
       a piazza and a platform ; and this was the case with two of the
     6 piazzas, for there were three one above another.—But they
       had not pillars like the pillars of the outer piazzas ; therefore
       the upper chambers were straightened more than the middle
     7 and the middle more than those on the ground. And they had
       light from without in the same manner as the chambers of
       the outer court, in front of these chambers on the north,
    8 the extent being fifty cubits. For the chambers which looked
       into the outer court were fifty cubits deep and were the fore
    9 front of these.  The whole building was a hundred cubits long.
       Now there were doors of these chambers opening into an en-
       try facing the east.So there was a passage through them from
       the outer court along this entry to the lighted walk at the head
   10 of this passage. And with regard to those on the south in front
       of that vacancy and in front of that partition wall, both the
   11 chambers and the walk before them were of the same mea-
       sures as those of the chambers on the north.Their length was
       the same ; and their breadth the same.  And all their outlets
       and all their windings were the same ; and their lights and their
    12 doors the same.  And these chambers on the south had in like
       manner doors from the head of the walk into an entry which
    13 was a reed broad and gave a passage to the east.And he said
       to me, these chambers on the north and those on the south
       which are in front of the vacancies, are the chambers of the
       sanctuary, in which the priests the sons of Sadduk, who come
       near to the Lord, are to eat the holy meats and where they are
       to lay up the most holy things, the sacrifice and the sin offerings
       and the trespass offerings.Because this is a holy place, none
   14 but the priests are to go in there.That they who offer up the
       offerings may be continually holy, and that none may touch
                                                                                                                      ;
                                                          EZEKIEL.
              Ch. XLIII.
                   the garments in which they minister because they are holy,
                   the priests must not go out from the sanctuary into the outer
                    court.      And when they are to mix with the people they must
                    put on other garments.
              15         Now when he had completed the measuring of the inner
                    house, he then led me out by the way of the gate facing the east
              16 and measured the plot of the house all around in order.                                        Hav-
                    ing taken a station behind the gate facing the east he measur-
              17 ed five hundred cubits with the measuring reed.                                      Then turn-
                    ing at the north he measured the north side five hundred cu-
              18 bits with his measuring reed.                         Then turning at the west he
                    measured the west side H\e hundred with his measuring reed
              19 then turning at the south he measured five hundred with his
              20 measuring reed.                The four sides of the height and breadth of
                    this same reed.             And he appointed this, namely, the surround-
                    ing parapet wall which was five hundred cubits on the east
                    side and five hundred cubits broad to make a separation be-
                    tween the Holies and the vacant space before the wall, which
                    was to be comprehended in the plot of the house.
               XLIII.            Then he brought me to the gate facing the east and
                 2 led me out, and lo ! the glory of the God of Israel was coming
                 3 by the way of the east ; and the sound of his march was like
                    the sound of redoubling multitudes and the earth glared with
                    the splendour of the glory around.                           And the vision which I
                    saw was like that which I beheld when I went to judge the
                     city.     And the appearance of the chariot which I saw was the
                 4 same as that which I saw at the river Chobar.                               So I fell on my
                     face.     And the glory of the Lord entered the house by the way
                 5 of the gate which faced the east.                           Then a spirit took me up
                     and brought me to the inner court.                       And lo ! the house was fill-
                 6 ed with the glory of the Lord.                       So I stopped.           And lo ! a voice
                     from the house, of one speaking to me, and the man stood
                 7 near me.            And he said to me, Son of man, Thou hast seen
                     the place of my throne and the place of my footsteps, where
                     my name should dwell in the midst of the house of Israel for-
                     ever, that the house of Israel may no more profane my holy
                     name ; neither they nor their leaders, by their fornication and
                  8 by the murders of their leaders in the midst of them.                                  By their
                     joining my porch to their porches and their thresholds to my
   Ch. XLIII.                      EZEKIEL.
       thresholds they made my wall as it were common to me and
       them and profaned my holy name by their iniquities which
        they committed.     Therefore I destroyed them with my wrath
     9 and with slaughter.       But now let them put away their fornica-
        tion and the murders of their rulers far from me ; and I will
    10 dwell in the midst of them forever.          And thou son of man ;
        shew the house of Israel this house and let them cease from
    11 their sins.   Point out the figure and arrangement of it ; and let
        them receive their punishment for all that they have done.
        Delineate the house and its outlets and its whole figure
        and make known to them the ordinances thereof and all the
       rites thereof.   And that they may keep my rules of rectitude
    12 and all my ordinances and practice them, thou shalt sketch out
        in their sight the draft of this house on the top of this moun-
        tain, all the boundaries of it round about being Holy of Ho-
        lies.
    13      Now these are the measures of the altar by the cubit of a
        cubit and a hand breadth—the curvature at the bottom a cu-
       bit, that is the breadth of a cubit ; and the border upon the
    14 edge of it round about, a span.       And this is the height of the
        altar—from the lowest part of the beginning of its curvature
        to the great propitiatory from beneath, two cubits ; and its
        breadth a cubit : and from the little propitiatory four cubits
    15 and its breadth a cubit.       Then the ariel four cubits and from
    16 the ariel and upwards the horns one cubit.            And the ariel is
        twelve cubits long by twelve broad, the four angles and sides
    17 being equal.      And the propitiatory is fourteen cubits long and
        fourteen cubits broad, its four sides being equal.      And the bor-
        der encircling it all around is half a cubit ; and the compass of
        it a cubit all around.   And the steps up to it face the east.
    18      Then he said to me, Son of man, Thus saith the Lord the
        G-od of Israel, These are the ordinances of the altar on the day
    19 when they make it, to offer thereon whole burnt offerings and
        to pour blood upon it.     Thou shalt give a young bull from the
        herd of a sin offering to the priests, the Levites of the house
        of Sadduk who come near to me, saith the Lord God, to mi-
    20 nister to me ; and they shall take some of the blood thereof and
        put it on the four horns of the altar and on the four corners of
        the altar, and on the base round about and make atonement
             XLIV.                  EZEKIEL.
         Ch.
         21 for it. Then they shall take the young bull for the sin offering
            and it shall be burned in the appointed place of the house
         22 without the Holies.   And on the second day they shall take
            two kids of the goats without blemish for a sin offering and
            make atonement for the altar as they did with the young bull.
         23 And after finishing this atonement they shall offer a young
            bull from the herd without blemish, and a ram from the flock
         24 without blemish.  And you shall present them before the Lord ;
            and the priests shall throw salt upon them, and carry them up
         25 as whole burnt offerings for the Lord.    For seven days thou
            shalt offer every day a kid for a sin offering and a young bull
         26 from the herd and a ram from the flock.   For seven days they
            shall offer these sacrifices without blemish, and make atone-
            ment for the altar and purify it and shall fill their own hands.
        27 And from the eighth day and thenceforward the priests shall sa-
            crifice upon the altar your whole burnt offerings and your of-
            ferings of thanksgiving and I will accept you, saith the Lord.
        XLIV.       Then he brought me back by the way of the outer gate
         2 of these holy places, facing the east, and it was shut.And the
            Lord said to me, This gate shall be kept shut. It shall not be
            opened, nor shall any pass through it. Because the Lord God
         3 of Israel will enter in at it, therefore it shall be kept shut.Con-
            sequently, when the ruler himself shall sit there to eat bread
            before the Lord, he shall come in by the way of the ailam of
            this gate and by that way he shall go out.
         4     Then he brought me in by the way of the north gate over
            against the house, and I beheld and lo ! the house of the Lord
         5 was filled with glory and I fell on my face. And the Lord said
            to me, Son of man, Lay up in thy heart and see with thine
            eyes and hear with thine ears, all that I say to thee concerning
            all the ordinances of the house of the Lord and all the customs
            thereof; and thou shalt attend diligently to the way of entering
            into the house and to all the ways out of it in all these holy
         6 places.  And thou shalt say to this provoking house, to the
            house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord God, Let it suffice you,
         7    house of Israel, for all your iniquities, that you have intro-
           duced strangers, uncircumcised in heart and uncircumcised
           in flesh, to be present in these holy places of mine and to pro-
            fane them when you were offering loaves, flesh meat and
   Ch. XLIV.                  EZEKIEL.
    8 blood.  You indeed broke rny covenant by all your iniquities
      and you appointed them to keep the watches in my holy places.
    9 Therefore thus saith the Lord God, No stranger, uncircum-
      cised in heart and uncircumcised in flesh shall enter into my
      holy places.  Among all the sons of other families which are
      comprehended in the house of Israel none but the Levites only
   10 shall enter. Such of these as were drawn away from me when
      Israel strayed from me after their own desires shall indeed bear
      their iniquity and be ministering servants in my sanctuary.
   11 They shall be porters at the gates of the house and minister-
      ing servants for the house.  They shall kill the sacrifices and
      the whole burnt offerings for the people and they shall stand
   12 before the people to wait upon them.   Because they waited on
      them before their idols, and this brought on Israel the punish-
   13 ment of rebellion ; therefore I have lifted up my hand against
      them, saith the Lord God, that they shall not come near me to
      minister to me as priests, nor approach the holy things of the
      children of Israel, nor to my Holy of Holies ; but shall bear
      their dishonour for the error of which they have been guilty.
   14 And they shall be compelled to keep the watches of the house,
      to perform all the services of the house and all the services re-
      quired of them by the priests, the Levites, the sons of Sad-
   15 duk.   These kept the watches of my sanctuary when the house
      of Israel strayed from me.  These shall approach me to minis-
      ter to me.   And they shall stand before me to offer unto me
   16 sacrifice, suet and blood, saith the Lord God.These shall en-
      ter into my sanctuary ; and these shall come to my table to mi-
   17 nister to me.  And they shall keep my watches.     And when
      they enter the gates of the inner court, they shall be dressed
      in linen robes and shall not wear woollens, while they are of-
   18 flciating within the gate of the inner court. And they shall
      have linen mitres on their heads, and linen drawers about their
   19 loins.  And they shall not be tightly girded. And when they
      are going out into the outer court to the people, they shall put
      off their linen robes in which they minister and lay them up in
       the chambers of the sanctuary and put on other robes.For with
   20 those robes of theirs they must not hallow the people.  More-
       over they shall not shave their heads, nor pull out their hair by
   21 the roots.  They shall keep their heads covered. And none of
          VOL. II.               4 H
                                        EZEKIEL.
           Ch. XLV.
              the priests shall drink wine when they go into the inner court.
          22 Moreover they shall not take to wife a widow, nor one who
              hath been divorced ; but only a virgin of the race of Israel.
              However, if there be a widow of a priest, they may take her.
          23 And they shall teach my people the difference between what
              is holy and what is common, and cause them to distinguish
          24 between clean and unclean.      And they shall attend at trials for
              blood to pronounce sentence.      They shall acquit according to
              my statutes, and condemn according to my judgments.             And
              they shall keep all my rites and mine ordinances at all my fes-
          25 tivals and shall hallow my sabbaths.      And they shall not go in
              where there is a person dead, to defile themselves.       Only for a
              father or for a mother, or for a son or for a daughter, or for a
              brother or for a sister that hath not been married, shall a priest
          26 defile himself.   And after he is purified thou shalt reckon for
          27 him seven days.     And on the day when they go into the inner
              court to officiate in the sanctuary they shall offer an atonement,
          28 saith the Lord God.      Now with regard to their inheritance I
              will be their inheritance, therefore no possession shall be given
              them among the sons of Israel.
          29     Because I am their possession, therefore they shall eat the
              sacrifices and the sin offerings and the offerings for inadver-
          30 tencies.    Moreover every dedication in Israel shall be for
              them.—All the first fruits and all the firstlings and all obla-
              tions.  Of all your first fruits a part shall be for the priests,
              therefore you shall give your first fruits to the priest that your
          31 blessings may rest on your houses.      But whatever hath died of
              itself and whatever hath been torn by wild beasts, whether it
             be of fowls or of cattle, the priests shall not eat.
          XLV.       Moreover when you parcel out the land for possessions,
             you shall set apart for the Lord an oblation from the land, a
             holy portion twenty five thousand cubits in length and twenty
           2 thousand cubits in breadth.      It shall be holy in all its borders
             round about.     And out of this shall be the holy portions, five
             hundred cubits by five hundred cubits, a square all around, and
           3 a vacancy of fifty cubits all around it.   Oat of the measurement,
             when thou shalt measure off a length of twenty five thousand
              and a breadth of twenty thousand, part shall be for the Holy of
              Holies and part shall be for the priests who minister in the
     Ch. XLY.                                        EZEKTEL.
       4 sanctuary.              There shall be both for theui who draw near to
           minister to the Lord, and there shall be for the others, a place
       5 for houses set apart in their holy portions.                                          The length of
           twenty five thousand and the breadth of twenty thousand shall
           be for the Levites who serve in the house.                                   They shall have for
           a possession cities to dwell in.                          And for the possession of the
           city thou shalt give five thousand in breadth and twenty five
           thousand in length.                   This, in the same manner as that set apart
           for the sanctuary, shall belong to the whole house of Israel.
       7 And on each side of these there shall be allotted for the ruler,
           adjoining the holy oblation and the possession of the city, the
           tracts in front of the holy oblation and the possession of the
           city, both westward and eastward                             and the length shall be like
                                                                      ;
           one of the portions from the boundaries on the sea to the east-
       8 ern border of the land.                       And this shall be his possession in Is-
           rael.      And the rulers of Israel shall no more oppress my people
           and the house of Israel shall possess the land according to their
           tribes.
       9         Thus saith the Lord God, let this suffice you ;                                         princes of
           Israel.        Put an end to injustice and misery.                                   Execute judg-
     10 ment and justice.                     Kemove oppression from my people, saith
           the Lord God.                 Let your weights and measures be just.                                    Let
     11 your chenix be the just part of the measure; and let the che-
           nix uniformly contain the tenth of a gomar.                                      Let a chenix and
     12 a tenth of a gomar, as it respecteth a gomar, be equal.                                            And the
           weights shall be twenty oboli, five shekels, fifteen shekels.                                          And
           fifty shekels shall be your mna.
      13         Now this shall be the oblation which you shall set apart, a
      14 sixth of a measure from the gomar of wheat and the sixth of
           the same ephah from the core of barley.                                   And the ordinance of
            oil shall be one cotula of oil from ten cotulas ; for the ten cotu-
      15 las are a gomar.                   And a sheep from the flock, from every ten,
            shall be an oblation from all the families of Israel for sacrifices
            and for whole burnt offerings and for offerings of thanksgiving
      16 to make atonement for you, saith the Lord God.                                              And all the
            people shall give this oblation to the ruler of Israel ; and by the
            ruler shall be given the whole burnt offerings and the sacrifi-
            ces and the libations at the festivals and at the new moons and
      17 on the sabbaths.                   At all the festivals of the house of Israel he
        Oh. XLVI.                  EZEKIEL.
           shall make the sin offerings and the sacrifices and the whole
           burnt offerings and the offerings of thanksgiving to make atone-
            ment for the house of Israel.
        18     Thus saith the Lord God, In the first month on the first
            day of the month, you shall take from the herd a young bull
        19 without blemish, to make atonement for the sanctuary.   And
            the priest shall take some of the blood of the atonement and
           put it on the door posts of the house and on the four corners of
            the temple and on the altar and on the posts of the gate of the
        20 inner court.  And in like manner thou shalt do in the seventh
            month.  On the first of that month thou shalt receive a portion
            from every individual and you shall make atonement for the
        21 house.  And in the first month, on the fourteenth day of this
        22 month, shall be your paschal festival.Seven days you shall eat
            unleavened bread.  And on that day the ruler shall offer, for
            himself and his house and for all the people of the land, a young
        23 bull for a sin offering.And during the seven days of the fes-
            tival he shall offer as whole burnt offerings to the Lord, seven
            young bulls and seven rams without blemish, every day du-
            ring the seven days ; and for a sin offering, a kid of the goats
        24 every day with a sacrifice.And thou shalt prepare a cake for
            the bull and cakes for the rams, with a bin of oil to the cake.
        25 And in the seventh month, on the fifteenth of the month, at that
            festival thou shalt do in like manner, during seven days, as well
            in regard to the sin offerings as to the whole burnt offerings and
            the cakes and the oil.
        XLVI.      Thus saith the Lord God, The gate of the inner court
            which faceth the east, shall be kept shut the six working days.
            On the day of the sabbaths it must be opened and on the day
          2 of the new moon it shall be opened. And the ruler shall go in
            by the way of the ailam of the gate on the inside and shall
            stand in the porch of the gate. And the priests shall prepare
            his whole burnt offerings and his offerings of thanksgiving ; and
            he shall make his adoration in the porch of the gate and go out.
          3 But the gate shall not be shut till evening.And the people of
            the land shall make their adorations on a range with the porch
            of this gate, both on the sabbath days and at the new moons,
          4 before the Lord. And on the sabbath days the ruler shall offer
            to the Lord, for whole burnt offerings, six lambs without blem-
       5
     Ch. XLVI.                       EZEKIEL.
         ish and a rain without blemish and a libation and cake for the
      5 ram ; and for the lambs, a sacrifice, a free will offering with
         a hin of oil to every cake ; and on the day of the new moon a
       6 young bull without blemish and six lambs and a ram which
       7 shall be without blemish ; and there shall be a cake for the
         ram and a cake for the young bull with a libation, and for the
       8 lambs a voluntary gift and a hin of oil to every cake.      And when
         the ruler cometh in he shall come in by the way of the ailam
       9 of the gate, but he shall go out by the way of the gate.
         And when the people of the land come in before the Lord at
         the festivals, he who cometh in at the north gate to worship,
         shall go out at the south gate : and he who cometh in at the
         south gate shall go out at the north gate.          He shall not turn
         back to the gate at which he entered, but shall go out straight
      10 forward.    And if the ruler is in the midst of them when they
         come in, he shall come in with them, and when they go out he
      11 shall go out.    Both at the festivals and at the general assem-
         blies there shall be a libation and cake for the young bull and
         a cake for the ram ; and for the lambs a voluntary gift with a
      12 hin of oil for every cake.     And if the ruler shall make a volun-
         tary whole burnt offering of thanksgiving to the Lord, he may
         cause to be opened for himself the gate facing the east and
         make his whole burnt offering and his offerings of thanksgiv-
         ing in the same manner as he doth on the day of the sabbaths.
          Then he shall go out, and after he is gone out he shall cause
      13 the gates to be shut.—Moreover he shall every day prepare a
          lamb of the first year without blemish for a whole burnt offer-
      14 ing to the Lord.     In the morning he shall prepare it ; and every
          morning he shall prepare the libation for it, the sixth of the mea-
          sure and the third of an hin of oil to mix up the offering of
      1   fine flour for the Lord.    This is a standing order, you shall of-
          fer the lamb and its libation.     And you shall offer the oil every
          morning.    It is a continual whole burnt offering.
      16      Thus saith the Lord God, If the ruler make a gift to one
          of his sons out of his inheritance, his sons shall hold it as an
      17 hereditary possession; but if he make a gift to one of his
          servants, it shall be his to the year of jubilee, and shall then
      18 revert to the ruler.      None but his sons shall have an heredi-
          tary right.   The ruler must not take any part of the people's
       Cb. XLVII.               EZEKIEL.
          inheritance by oppression. Out of bis own possessions be
          sball give an inheritance to his sons, that my people may not
          be driven every one from his possession.
       19    Then he led me to the entrance of the passage behind
          the gate, leading to the chambers of the priests facing the
       20 north. And lo ! here was a place set apart.And he said to
          me, This is the place where the priests are to boil the tres-
          pass offerings, and the sin offerings and where they are to
          bake all the offerings of flour, that they may not carry them
          out into the outer court, for fear of hallowing the people.
       21    Then he led me to the outer court and conducted me round
          the four sides of the court.And lo ! a court at the four cor-
       22 ners of this court. At every corner a court; a court with
          four sides; and the little court of this court was forty cubits
       23 long and thirty cubits broad.The four were of the same mea-
          sure ;and in them were chambers around the four. And un-
       24 der these chambers round about were kitchens.And he said
          to me, These are the houses of the cooks, where they who
          minister in the house are to boil the sacrifices of the people.
       XLVII.     Then he brought me to the vestibule of the house,
          and lo ! water gushed out from under the porch eastward ; for
          the front of the house faced the east ; and the water ran down
        2 from the right corner, from the south, by the altar.And he
          led me out by the way of the north gate, and conducted me
          round on the outside to the gate facing the east ; and lo ! the
          water flowed down from the right corner, as a man cometh
        3 out. And having a measure in his hand, he measured a thou-
          sand with the measure, and waded across a purling stream.
       4 Then he measured a thousand with the measure, and waded
          through water up to the thighs. Then he measured a thou-
        5 sand and waded through water up to the loins.Then he mea-
          sured a thousand and could not cross it ; for it was swelled
        6 to an impassable torrent.And he said to me, Hast thou seen,
          Son of man? Then he led and brought me back along the
        7 border of the river.And on my return, behold there were
          on the bank of the river, trees in great abundance on both
        8 sides. And he said to me, This water which is flowing out
          to the eastern part of Galilee, hath indeed gone down to Ara-
                                                                    —
     Ch. XLVII.                 EZEKIEL.
        bia, and hath come to the sea to the water of the outlet, and it
      9 will heal the waters ; so that every of the animals which breed
        in all the places whithersoever the stream cometh, shall live,
        and there shall be fish there in great abundance, Because this
        water is come there and healeth, therefore they shall live.
     10 Every thing to which the stream cometh shall live.   And fish-
        ermen shall there take a stand, from Engaclin to Enagallim.
        There shall be a place for drying nets.   The nets shall be of
        a peculiar kind ; and the fishes thereof shall be like the fishes
     11 of the great sea ; a very great multitude.But when it is forced
        from its channel and when it is turned from its course, and
        when it is caused to swell immoderately, the waters will not
     12 heal.  They are turned into salt.   And along the river there
        shall spring up on both banks, all sorts of trees fit for food.
        Their leaves shall never fade ; nor shall their fruit ever fail.
        They shall always be in the act of producing fresh fruit, be-
        cause the waters which nourish them flow down from the
        sanctuary.  And their fruit shall be for food, and their leaves
        for medicine.
     13    Thus saith the Lord God, These are the boundaries of the
        land, which you shall inherit. It is an allotted portion for the
     14 twelve tribes of Israel.And you shall inherit it, one as well as
        another.  It is that for which I lifted up my hand that I would
     15 give it to their fathers; therefore this land shall fall to you for
        an inheritance, and these are the boundaries of the land—on
        the north from the great sea which cometh down and the bay
    16 of Emaseldam, Maabtheras, Ebrameliam between the bor-
        ders of Damascus and the borders of Emathei, the court of
    17 Saunan, which are above the borders of Auranitis, these are the
        borders from the sea; from the court of Ainan the borders of
    IS Damascus.    These are the northern boundaries.  And with re-
        gard to the borders on the east between Loranitis and between
        Damascus and between Galaditis and the laud of Israel, the
        Jordan is the boundary to the sea which is eastward in front
    19 of Phcenicon.   These are the eastern boundaries.  And on the
        south the boundaries are from Thaiman and Phoenicon to the
        water of Marimoth Kadem, thence to the great sea.     This is
    20 the southern boundary.    Thence a part of the great sea is the
        boundary to over against the bay of Emath even to the en-
            XLVIII.               EZEKIEL.
        Ch.
           trance thereof. These are the boundaries to the sea of Emath.
        21 And you shall measure out this land for them to the tribes of
        22 Israel. You shall parcel it out by lot among you and the pro-
           selytes who dwell among you.    Whoever have begotten sons
           among you shall be yours as natives among the children of
           Israel. With you they shall enjoy an inheritance among the
        23 tribes of Israel, but they shall be classed in the tribe of pro-
           selytes among the proselytes who are with you.    There you
           shall give them an inheritance, saith the Lord God.
        XLVIII.      Now these are the names of the tribes beginning
           northward along the bay to the harbour of Emath, the court
           of Ailam, the border of Damascus northward, along part of
           Emath Aula ; and they shall have from their eastern boundary
         2 to the sea one portion for Dan.  And bordering on Dan from
         3 the eastern boundary to the sea a portion for Aser. And bor-
           dering on Aser from the eastern boundary to the sea a por-
         4 tion for Nephthaleim ; and bordering on Nephthaleim from the
         5 eastern boundary to the sea, a portion for Manasses ; and bor-
           dering on Manasses from the eastern boundary to the sea, a
         6 portion for Ephraim ; and bordering on Ephraim from the
         7 eastern boundary to the sea, a portion for Keuben ; and bor-
           dering on Reuben from the eastern boundary to the sea, a por-
         8 tion for Jucla ; and bordering on Juda from the eastern bounda-
           ry shall be the dedicated portion twenty five thousand cubits
           broad and the length like one of the portions from the eastern
           boundary to the sea, so the sanctuary shall be in the midst of
         9 them.  The oblation which you shall set apart for the Lord
           shall be twenty five thousand cubits long and twenty five
        10 thousand broad.  Out of these there shall be for the priests
           the holy dedication, on the north side twenty five thousand
           and on the west side ten thousand and on the south side twen-
           ty five thousand. And the mountain of the Holies shall be in
        11 the midst of it. To the priests, the consecrated sons of Sad-
           duk, who keep the watches of the house, who were not led
        12 astray in the apostasy of the children of Israel, as the Levites
           were, even to them this dedicated portion is given out of the
           dedicated portions of the land, as a Holy of Holies, apart
           from the Levites : and to the Levites shall be given, adjoin-
        13 ing the borders of the priests, a portion twenty five thousand
     Ch. XLVIII.              EZEKIEL.
        cubits long and ten thousand broad; the whole being twenty
     14 five thousand in length and twenty thousand in breadth.No
        part of this shall be sold ; nor shall it be parcelled out ; nor
        shall the first fruits of this land be set apart ; for it is dedicated
     15 to the Lord.  And with regard to the overplus twenty five
        thousand in length and five thousand broad, out of it there shall
        be a plot for the city, for building and for the open walk around
     16 it. Now the city shall be in the middle of it, and these shall
        be its dimensions—on the north, four thousand five hundred
        cubits ; and on the south, four thousand five hundred ; and on
        the east, four thousand five hundred ; and on the west, four
     17 thousand five hundred. And the open walk for the city shall
        be on the north, two hundred and fifty, and on the south, two
        hundred and fifty, and on the east, two hundred and fifty, and
     18 on the west, two hundred and fifty.And the residue of the length
        adjoining the holy dedication, ten thousand on the east and ten
        thousand on the west side shall be dedicated portions, and
        they who occupy the city shall have the products thereof for
     19 bread. It may be worked by any out of all the tribes of Israel
     20 who occupy the city.  The whole oblation twenty five thou-
        sand by twenty Rye thousand shall be a square.From it you
        shall set apart the oblation for the sanctuary bordering on the
     21 possession of the city.And the residue on the one side and the
        other shall be for the ruler, bordering on the holy dedications
        and along the possession of the city for twenty five thousand
        in length, and thence to the eastern boundary and westward
        by twenty five thousand to the western boundary.Adjoining
        these portions of the ruler shall be the holy oblation.And the
        dedication appropriate to the house shall be in the middle of
     22 it and taken from the Levites, and shall border on the posses-
        sion of the city which is in the middle between the ruler's
        portions.And it shall be between the borders of Juda and the
     23 borders of Benjamin and the portions of the ruler.And with
        respect to the rest of the tribes, there shall be from the eastern
     24 boundary to the sea, a portion for Benjamin : and bordering
        on Benjamin from the eastern boundary to the sea, a portion
     25 for Symeon : and bordering on Symeon, from the eastern
    26 boundary to the sea, a portion for Issachar : and bordering on
        Issachar from the eastern boundary to the sea, a portion for
           VOL. II.              4 I
                                                                                                                                          ;
                      XLVIII.                                    EZEKIEL.
              Ch.
             27 Zabulon :                and bordering upon Zabulon from the eastern
                    boundary to the sea, a portion for Gad : and the borders of
             28 Gad shall be from the eastern boundary and on the south
                    along by the border of Thaiman and the waters of Baremoth
             29 Kades included in his possession, to the great sea.                                                           This is
                    the land which you shall parcel out by lot among the tribes of
                    Israel : and these are their portions, saith the Lord God.
             30             Moreover these shall be the streets of the city, those
             31 running northward four thousand five hundred cubits ; and the
                    gates of the city shall be named after the tribes of Israel, three
                    gates facing the north, one gate Keuben, one gate Juda and
             32 one gate Levi ; and those running eastward four thousand five
                   hundred cubits, with three gates, one gate Joseph and one
             33 gate Benjamin and one gate Dan : and those running south-
                   ward, four thousand five hundred cubits with three gates, one
             34 gate Symeon and one gate Issachar and one gate Zabulon
                   and those running westward four thousand five hundred cu-
                   bits with three gates, one gate Gad, and one gate Aser and
                   one gate Nephthaleim.                           The circumference eighteen thousand.
                   And the name of the city from the day it is built shall be the
                   name it now hath.
                                                                  DANIEL.
            I.          IN the third year of the reign of Joakim king of Juda, Na-
                   buchodonosar the king of Babylon came to Jerusalem and be-
               2 sieged it.             And the Lord delivered into his hand Joakim king
                   of Juda and a part of the vessels of the house of God, which
                   he carried to the land of Sennaar to the house of his god : and
                   having deposited the vessels in the treasure house of his god,
               3 the king ordered Asphanez his high chamberlain to bring in
                   of the children of the captivity of Israel, namely, of the seed
              4 royal and of the nobility, some youths who had no blemish,
                   and who were of a good countenance, studious of every sci-
                   ence, improved in knowledge and understanding and quali-
                   fied to stand in the house before the king ; and to instruct them
              5 in the learning and language of the Chaldeans.                                                  And the king
                  ordered them a daily allowance from the king's table, and of
                  the wine for his own drinking ; and that they should be diet-
                  ed for three years and after that stand before the king.
                                                                                                                                          ;
                    II.                                           DANIEL.
            Ch.
              6          Now there were among them of the children of Juda, Da-
              7 niel and Ananias and Azarias and Misael ; and the high cham-
                  berlain gave them names, to Daniel, Baltasar ; and to Ananias,
                  Sedrach ;            and to Misael, Misach ; and Azarias, Abdenago.
              8 And Daniel having resolved not to pollute himself with the ta-
                  ble of the king nor with the wine which he drank, intreated the
              9 chamberlain that he might not be denied.                                                      Now God had
                  brought Daniel into favour and compassion with the high
            10 chamberlain, therefore the chamberlain said to Daniel, I am
                  afraid of my lord the king who hath appointed your meat and
                  your drink.               Perhaps he may see your countenance more un-
                  comely than the youths of your age, and you may endanger
            11 my head with the king.                                  Thereupon Daniel said to Amelsad,
                  whom the high chamberlain had set over Daniel, Ananias,
            12 Misael and Azarias, Try thy servants, we pray thee, ten days,
                  and let them give us vegetables to eat and water to drink ; and
            13 let our countenances and the countenances of the youths who
                  eat of the king's table be examined in thy presence; and, as
            14 thou seest, deal with thy servants.                                       So he hearkened to them
            15 and tried them ten days.                              And at the end of the ten days their
                  countenances appeared more comely and their flesh firmer
                  than that of the youths, who had eaten of the king's table
            16 whereupon Amelsad took away the food and the wine for
            17 their drink and gave them vegetables.                                              And as for these four
                  youths, God gave them knowledge and understanding in all
                  literature and science; and Daniel was skilled in all visions
            18 and dreams.                   And at the end of the years which the king had
                   appointed for introducing them, the high chamberlain brought
            19 them in before Nabuchodonosar.                                            And the king conversed
                  with them.              And among them all there were none found equal
                   to Daniel and Ananias and Misael and Azarias.                                                  So they stood
            20 before the king.                      And in every subject of wisdom and science
                   on which the king questioned them he found them ten times
                   more skilled than all the soothsayers and the magians who
                   were in the realm.                     And Daniel continued to the first year of
                   Cyrus the king.
             11.          Nabuchodonosar, in the second year of his reign, dreamed
                   a dream and his spirit was troubled and his sleep went from
                                                                               —
        Oh. II.                          DANIEL.
          2 him.   And the king gave orders to call the soothsayers and the
            magians and the chymists and the Chaldees that they might
          3 tell the king his dream.     And when they were come and stood
            before the king, the king said to them, I have dreamed and
          4 my mind is anxious to know the dream.                Whereupon the
            Chaldees said to the king in Syriac,        king, live forever.   Tell
          5 thy servants the dream and we will explain the meaning.           The
            king answered the Chaldees, The subject is gone from me.            If
            you do not tell me the dream and the interpretation you shall
            be put to death and your houses shall be exposed to plunder.
          6 But if you let me know the dream and the interpretation, you
            shall receive of me gifts and immunities and great honour.         At
            all events, tell me the dream and the meaning of it.         They an-
            swered again and said, Let the king tell his servants the dream
         8 and we will explain the meaning.         In reply to which the king
            said, I know of a truth that you want to gain time, as you see
          9 the matter is gone from me.      If therefore you do not tell me the
            dream, I take it for granted that you have agreed upon some-
            thing false and fictitious to be said before me, until the time elapse.
        10 Tell me my dream, then I will know thatyou can tell me the mean-
            ing of it.   The Chaldees answered in the presence of the king
            and said, There is not a man on the earth who can make known
            what the king requireth ; nor doth any king or ruler, however
            great, ask such a thing, of any soothsayer, magian or Chaldee.
        11 For the thing which the king requireth is so difficult, that there
            is none who can lay it before the king, but the gods only, whose
        12 dwelling is not with flesh.     Upon this the king in furious wrath
            gave orders to destroy all the wise men of Babylon.            So the
            decree went forth.    And when the wise men began to be slain
        13      (Now search had been made for Daniel and hisfriends to slay
        14 them and Daniel had then addressed Arioch, the king's mar-
            shal, who was going out to slay the wise men of Babylon,
        15 touching the counsel and decree, "Why,             chief of the king,
        16 hath this horrid sentence gone forth from the king's presence?"
            And when Arioch informed Daniel of the matter, Daniel had
            intreated the king to grant him time and he would tell the
        17 king the meaning of it ; and Daniel had gone to his house and
        18 acquainted his friends Ananias, Misael and Azarias with the
            affair ; and they had sought mercy of the God of heaven touch-
    Cli. II.                        DANIEL.
        ing this secret, that Daniel and his friends might not perish
    19 with the rest of the wise men of Babylon : and the secret was
        revealed to Daniel in a vision of the night ; whereupon he
    20 blessed the God of heaven, and said, " Blessed be the name
    21 of God from everlasting to everlasting ; for wisdom and know-
        ledge are his ; and he changeth times and seasons.      He setteth up
        kings and removeth them.       He giveth wisdom to the wise and
    22 understanding to them who have knowledge.            He it is who re-
        vealeth deep and hidden things.      He knoweth the things which
    23 are in darkness.    And with him is the light.        To thee,     God
        of my fathers, I give thanks and praise ; because thou hast
        given me wisdom and power and hast made known to me
        what we asked thee and hast revealed to me the vision of the
        king.)
    24      Then Daniel went to Arioch whom the king had appoint-
        ed to slay the wise men of Babylon, and said to him, Destroy
        not the wise men of Babylon ; but introduce me to the king,
    25 and I will tell him the meaning.            Thereupon Arioch with
        haste introduced Daniel to the presence of the king and said
        to him, I have found among the captives of Israel, a man
    26 who can tell the king the interpretation.          And the king ad-
        dressing Daniel, whose name was Baltasar, said, Canst thou
    27 tell me the dream which I saw, and the meaning of it ?             And
        Daniel answered in the presence of the king and said, The
       secret which the king demandeth, it is not in the power of wise
    28 men, magians, sooth sayers, gazarenes, to tell the king.         There
        is none but God in heaven who revealeth secrets.           He indeed
        hath made known to the king Nabuchodonosar what must
        come to pass in latter days.       With regard to thy dream, and
    29 the visions of thy head, on thy bed, this is it.       Thy thoughts,
           king, on thy bed ascended to what might come to pass
       hereafter.   And he who revealeth secrets made known to thee
    30 the things which must come to pass.           And to me this secret
       was revealed, not indeed for any wisdom in me above all the
       living : but for the purpose of making the interpretation known
       to the king, that thou mayst know the thoughts of thy heart.
    31 Thou,      king ! didst behold, and lo ! an image !        Great was
       that image and its aspect lofty as it stood before thee ; and its
    32 appearance was awful.       It was an image, the head of which
                                                                                —
          Ch. II.                         DANIEL.
              was of pure gold ; the hands and the breast and the arms of
              it were of silver ; the belly and the thighs of brass ; the legs
          33 of iron ; the feet partly of iron, and partly of potter's clay.
          34 With wonder thou didst view it, till from a mountain there
              was rent without hands a stone, which smote the image on the
              feet, which were of iron and potters clay, and at last broke
          35 them to pieces.     Then were broken to pieces at once, the clay,
              the iron, the brass, the silver, the gold.  And they became like
              the dust of a threshing floor in summer: and a great wind
              swept them away, and there was no place found for them.
              And the stone which smote the image became a great nioun-
          36 tain and filled all the earth.     This is the dream.     The mean-
          37 ing of it we will now explain to the king.        Thou      king, art
              a king of kings, to whom the God of heaven hath given a king-
              dom, strong and mighty and glorious, in every place where
          38 the sons of men dwell.       Into thy hand he hath delivered the
              beasts of the field, and the birds of the air, and the fishes of
          39 the sea, and appointed thee lord over all.       Thou art the head
              of gold.  And after thee there shall be raised up another king-
              dom inferior to thee ; then a third kingdom which is the brass,
          40 which shall rule over the whole earth ; then a fourth kingdom
              which shall be strong as iron.    As iron breaketh to pieces and
          41 subdueth all things, so shall it break and subdue all.          And
              inasmuch as thou sawest the feet and toes, partly of clay and
              partly of iron, it shall be a disjointed kingdom, though there
              shall be in it some of its iron root.     As thou sawest the iron
          42 mixed with the clay ; and the toes of the feet were part iron,
              and part clay, some part of that kingdom will be strong and
          43 some part of it will be broken.      Inasmuch as thou sawest the
              iron mingled with the clay, there will be mixtures in it, of the
              seed of men, and they will not cement one with another, as
          44 iron cloth not cement with clay.        And in the days of those
              kings, the God of heaven will set up a kingdom which shall
              never be destroyed ; and this kingdom of his shall not be left
              to another people.    It shall break in pieces, and blow away all
          45 those kingdoms and shall itself stand forever.       As thou sawest
              that without hands there was cut from a mountain a stone, which
              broke in pieces the clay, the iron, the brass, the silver, the
              gold; the God who is great, hath made known to the king
    Ch. III.                        DANIEL.
        what must come to pass hereafter.         The dream indeed is true
        and the interpretation thereof is faithful.
    46      Then king Nabuckodonosar fell on his face, and made
        obeisance to Daniel and ordered holy gifts, and sweet odours
    47 to be offered to him.     And the king answered and said to Da-
        niel, Of a truth, your God is the God of Gods, and the Lord
        of kings, the revealer of secrets ; since thou hast been enabled
   48 to reveal this secret.     Then the king raised Daniel to high rank
       and gave him many great gifts, and set him over the whole re-
       gion of Babylon, and a chief satrap over all the wise men of
   49 Babylon.      And Daniel requested of the king, and he set Se-
       drach, Misach and Abdenago, over the works of the region
       of Babylon.     And Daniel was in the court of the king.
   III.      In the eighteenth year of Nabuchodonosar, the king made
       an image of gold ; the height of it was sixty cubits, and its
       breadth six cubits.    And having set it up in the plain of Dee-
    2 ira, in the province of Babylon, he sent for the presidents and
       the generals, and the governors, rulers and princes, and those
       in authority, and all the chiefs of the provinces, to come to
       the dedication of the image which Nabuchodonosar the king
    3 had set up.      And when the governors, the presidents, the ge-
       nerals, the leaders, the great princes, those in authority, and
       all the chiefs of the provinces were assembled for the dedica-
       tion of the image which Nabuchodonosar the king had set up,
       and were standing before the image, the herald cried with a
    4 loud voice, To you peoples of different tribes and languages
    5 command is given; whenever you shall hear the sound of the
       trumpet and syrinx and of the kithara and sanibuk and of the
       psaltery, and all kinds of musical instruments, prostrate your-
       selves and worship the golden image which Nabuchodonosar
    6 the king hath set up.      And whoever will not prostrate himself
       and worship, shall that very hour be cast into that furnace of
      fire, which is heating.
    7      So when the people heard the sound of the trumpet and
      syrinx, and of the kithara and sambuk, and of the psaltery,
      and all kinds of musical instruments, all the peoples, tribes and
      languages, falling     prostrate,   worshipped the golden image
    8 which Xabuchodonosar the king had set up.           Then came certain
      Chaldeans, and stated to the king an accusation against the
             III.                  DANIEL.
         Ch.
          9 Jews, "   king, live forever ! thou, king, hast made a de-
         10 cree, that every man who shall hear the sound of the trumpet
            and syrinx and of the kithara and sambuk, and of the psaltery
         11 and all kinds of musical instruments; and who will not pros-
            trate himself and worship the golden image, shall be cast into
         12 that furnace of fire which is heated.Now there are certain
            Jews whom thou hast set over the works of the province of
            Babylon, namely, Sedrach, Misach, Abdenago, who have not
            hearkened,  king, to thy decree.They neither serve thy gods,
            nor do they worship the golden image which thou hast set up."
        13     Upon this Nabuchodonosar in wrath and fury commanded
            to bring Sedrach, Misach, Abdenago : and when they were
        14 brought before the king, Nabuchodonosar addressed them, say-
            ing, Is it true, Sedrach, Misach, Abdenago, that you do not
            serve my gods, nor worship the golden image which I have
         15 set up?   Now therefore are you ready, when you hear the
            sound of the trumpet and syrinx and of the kithara and sam-
            buk and of the psaltery and symphony and all kinds of musi-
            cal instruments, to fall prostrate and worship the golden image
            which I have made ? For if you do not worship you shall, that
            very hour, be cast into the furnace of fire, which is heated.
         16 And what god is there who can deliver you out of my hands ?
            In reply to this, Sedrach, Misach, Abdenago said to the king
         17 Nabuchodonosar, We are at no loss to answer thee in respect
            to this matter.For our God in heaven, whom we worship, is
            able to deliver us out of the furnace of fire which is heated,
         18 and he will deliver us,  king, out of thy hands.  But even
            though he do not, be it known to thee,   king, that we can-
            not serve thy gods, nor will we worship the image which thou
         19 hast set up.At this Nabuchodonosar was filled with wrath, and
            the form of his countenance was changed against Sedrach, Mi-
            sach and Abdenago.  And he ordered to heat the furnace seven
         20 fold, till it was hot as possible : and commanded some strong
            men to bind Sedrach, Misach and Abdenago, and cast them
         21 into the furnace of fire which was heated. Then were these
            men bound, clad as they were with their Babylonish dress and
            with turbans and boots ; and cast into the midst of the furnace
            of fire which was heated, as the command of the king was pe-
         22 remptory.  But though the furnace was heated to an excessive
                               DANIEL.
    Ch. IV.
       degree and these three men, Sedrach, Misach and Abdenago fell
    23 bound into the midst of the glowing furnace, yet they walked
       about in the midst of the flame, praising God and blessing the
    24 Lord.  When Nabuchodonosar heard them singing praise he
       was amazed and starting up hastily said to his nobles, Did we
       not cast three men bound into the midst of the fire ?And when
    25 they said to the king, True,   king, the king said, Here I see
       four men loose and walking about in the midst of the fire un-
    26 hurt : And the appearance of the fourth is like a son of a god.
       Then Nabuchodonosar went near to the mouth of the burning-
       fiery furnace and said, Sedrach, Misach, Abdenago, ye ser-
       vants of the Most High God, come out and come hither.   Upon
       which Sedrach, Misach and xlbdenago came forth out of the
    27 midst of the fire. And the satraps and the generals and the go-
       vernors and the mighty men of the king gathered round and
       viewed the men with astonishment ; for the fire had not had
       any power over their body.  Even the hair of their heads was
       not singed, nor were their mantles changed, nor a smell of fire
    28 on them.   Then Nabuchodonosar the king addressing them,
       said, "Blessed be the God of Sedrach, Misach, Abdenago,
       who hath sent his angel and delivered his servants.   Because
       they have trusted in him and have altered the king's decree
       and delivered up their bodies to fire that they might not serve
       nor worship any god, but only their own God, therefore I issue
    29 this decree, "Every people, tribe, language, which shall utter
       any reproach against the God of Sedrach, Misach, Abdenago,
       shall be devoted to destruction and their houses to plunder : for
       there is no other god who can deliver in this manner."
    30     Then the king reinstated Sedrach, Misach and Abdenago
       in the province of Babylou, and advanced them in dignity and
       honoured them with a command over all the Jews in his realm.
    IV.    NABUCHODONOSAB the king, to all the peoples,
       tribes and languages who dwell in all the earth : Peace be mul-
       tiplied to you.
     2     It hath seemed good in my sight to declare to you the
       signs and the wonders which the God who is Most High hath
     3 done with me.  How great and mighty is his kingdom. His king-
           VOL. II.                4 K
                                                                                                                                ;
                      IV.                                       DANIEL.
               Ch.
                    dom is an everlasting kingdom ; and his dominion is to endless
                    ages.
                4         I Nabuchodonosar was at rest in my house and in the en-
                 5 joyment of prosperity.                      I had a dream which terrified me and I
                 6 was troubled on my bed, and the visions of my head disquiet-
                    ed me.         Therefore I issued a decree to bring before me all the
                     wise men of Babylon, that they might explain to me the mean-
                 7 ing of this dream.                     And when the soothsayers, the magians,
                     the gazarenes, the Chaldees came in, I told my dream before
                    them ; but they did not explain to me the meaning of it until
                8 Daniel came, whose name is Baltasar, after the name of my
                9 God, and who hath in him a holy spirit of a God.                                               To him I
                    said, Baltasar chief of the soothsayers, who, I know, hast a ho-
                    ly spirit of a god in thee, so that no secret can escape thee,
                    hear the vision of the dream which I have seen ; and tell me
              10 the meaning of it.                     1 beheld with astonishment on my bed, and
               11 lo ! a tree in the midst of the earth.                                 Though its height was
                    great, the tree increased in magnitude and strength and its top
                    reached up to heaven ; and its bulk to the extent of the whole
               12 earth.          Its leaves were beautiful and its fruit abundant.                                  And on
                    it there was food for all : and the wild beasts of the field dwelt
                    beneath it ; and the birds of the air lodged among its branches
              13 and from it all flesh was fed.                         I beheld in a vision of the night
                    on my bed ; and lo an Eir, even a holy one, came down from
                    heaven and cried with a loud voice, and thus he said, "Cut
              14 down that tree and lop off its branches and shake off its leaves
                    and scatter its fruit.                 Let the beasts be driven from underneath
              15 it and the birds from its branches.                              But leave the stump of its
                    roots in the earth ; and in a band of iron and brass and in the
                    green grass abroad and in the clew of heaven let it abide : and let
                    its portion be with the wild beasts in the grass of the earth.                                         His
               16 heart shall be changed from men and the heart of a wild beast
                    shall be given him and seven seasons shall revolve over him.
               17 The sentence is by the decree of an Eir; and the decree is a
                    request of holy ones, that the living may know that there is a
                    sovereign Lord of the kingdom of men and that he can give it
                     to whom he will, and set over it that which is disesteemed by
               18 men."           This is the dream, which I Nabuchodonosar the king
                    have seen.           Thou therefore Baltasar, tell me the meaning ; for
                                   DANIEL.
    Ch. IV.
        all the wise men of my kingdom are unable to explain to me
        the meaning of it : but thou Daniel art able, because there is in
        thee the holy spirit of a god.
     19     Upon this Daniel, whose name is Baltasar, was absorpt in
        astonishment for about an hour and his thoughts agitated him
        and Baltasar answered and said, Let this dream, my Lord, be
        for them who hate thee, and the interpretation thereof for thine
    20 enemies.     The tree which thou sawest, which was increased in
        magnitude and strength, the top of which reached up to hea-
        ven and its bulk to the extent of the whole earth, the leaves of
        which were beautiful and its fruit abundant, and on which
    21 there was food for all; beneath which the beasts of the field
        dwelt, and on the branches of which the birds of the air roost-
    22 ed: Thou,         king art it.    For thou art become great and
        strong and thy greatness hath increased and reached up to hea-
    23 ven and thy dominion to the limits of the earth.            And inas-
        much as the king saw an Eir, even a holy one descending from
        heaven who said, Cut down that tree and destroy it, but leave
        the stump of its roots in the earth ; and in a band of iron and
        brass and in the green grass abroad and in the dew of heaven
        let it abide ; and let its portion be with the wild beasts of the
    24 field until seven seasons revolve over it—This,           king, is the
        interpretation thereof and the decree of the Most High which
        is about to come upon my lord the king.           Thou wilt be dri-
    2.5 ven from among men ; and thy dwelling shall be with the beasts
        of the field ; and they will feed thee with grass like an ox ; and
        thou shalt lodge in the dew of heaven ; and seven seasons shall
        revolve over thee, till thou be made sensible that the Most
    26 High ruleth over the kingdom of men and can give it to whom
        he will.   But inasmuch as they said, Let the stump of the
        roots of the tree remain, thy kingdom shall remain for thee
    27 when thou art made sensible of the heavenly authority.            For
        this cause,    king, let my counsel be acceptable to thee ; and
        make atonement for thy sins by acts of kindness, and for thy
        transgressions by tender mercies for the distressed.         Perhaps
        God may forgive thine offences.
    28      All these things came upon Nabuchodonosar the king.            At
    29 the end of twelve months, as the king was walking in the temple
    30 of his kingdom at Babylon, he spake, saying, Is not this the
                                                                                                                      ;
              Ch. V.                                       DANIEL.
                   great Babylon which I have built for the house of a kingdom,
             31 by the might of my power, for the display of my glory ?                                      While
                   the word was yet in the king's mouth, there came a voice from
                   heaven, To thee Nabuchodonosar it is said, the regal power is
             32 gone from thee and thou shalt be driven from among men and
                   thy dwelling shall be with the beasts of the field; and they
                   shall feed thee with grass like an ox; and seven seasons shall
                   revolve over thee, that thou mayst know that the Most High
                   ruleth over the kingdom of men and can give it to whom he
             33 will.        In that very hour the word was fulfilled on Nabuchodo-
                   nosar; and he was driven from among men and ate grass like
                   an ox and his body was bathed with the dew of heaven, until
                   his hair grew strong like the shag of lions and his nails like the
             34 claws of birds.              And at the end of the days I Nabuchodonosar
                   lifted up mine eyes to heaven, and mine understanding was re-
                   stored to me, and I blessed the Most High and praised and
                   glorified him who liveth forever; for his dominion is an ever-
                   lasting dominion and his kingdom is to endless generations,
             35 and all the inhabitants of the earth are reckoned as nothing
                   and he doth according to his pleasure in the army of heaven
                   and in the habitations of the earth ; and there is none who can
             36 stay his hand, or say to him, What hast thou done.                                   At this very
                   hour my senses were restored to me and I reassumed the ho-
                   nour of my kingdom ; and my form returned to me ; and my
                   princes and my grandees sought me ; and I was re-established in
             37 my kingdom and greater majesty was added to me.                                       Now there-
                   fore I Nabuchodonosar praise and extol and glorify the king
                   of heaven ; for all his works are true and his ways are judg-
                   ments and all them who walk in pride he can abase.
             V.         KING Baltasar made a great supper for his thousand gran-
               2 dees and wine was set before the thousand.                                    And as he was
                   drinking, Baltasar gave an order upon tasting the wine, to bring
                   the vessels of gold and silver which Nabuchodonosar his fa-
                   ther had brought out of the temple at Jerusalem ; and that the
                   king and his nobles, and his concubines and his wives should
               3 drink out of them.                 Accordingly the vessels of gold and silver
                   which had been taken out of the temple of God at Jerusalem
                   were brought, and the king and his nobles and his concubines
                                 DANIEL.
     Ch. V.
      4 and his wives drank out of them.   And having drunk wine thev
        praised the gods of gold and silver and brass and wood and
      5 stone.  At that very hour there came forth fingers of a man's
        hand and wrote over against the lamp, on the plaistering of the
        wall of the king's palace.  And the king beheld with astonish-
      6 ment the joint of the hand that was writing.    Whereupon the
        king's countenance changed and his thoughts troubled him and
        the joints of his loins were loosened and his knees smote one
      7 against another.  And the king cried aloud to bring in the ma-
        gians, Chaldees, gazarenes.  And he said to the wise men of
        Babylon, Whoever shall read this writing and explain to me
        the meaning, he shall be clothed with purple and have a chain
        of gold for his neck and shall be a chief, third in rank, in my
      8 kingdom.   And when all the king's wise men came in and could
        neither read the writing nor explain the meaning to the king,
      9 king Baltasar was agitated and his countenance changed, and
     10 his nobles were in like trepidation.  Then the queen came to
        the banquet house and said,     king, live forever !Let not thy
     11 thoughts trouble thee, nor thy countenance change.     There is
        in thy kingdom a man, in whom is a spirit of a god, and in the
        clays of thy father, light and knowledge were found in him,
        and the king Nabuchodonosar thy father appointed him chief
        of the soothsayers, Chaldees, gazarenes, because of the extra-
     12 ordinary spirit in him, and of his understanding and know-
        ledge in the interpretation of dreams, and explaining hard sen-
        tences and solving difficulties—namely Daniel whom the king
        surnamed Baltasar.   Now therefore let him be called in and he
     13 will tell thee the meaning of this.      Thereupon Daniel was
        brought in before the king.     And the king said to Daniel,
        Thou art Daniel ?   One of the captives of Juda whom the king
     14 my father brought hither ?  I have heard of thee that there is in
        thee a spirit of a god, and that light and knowledge and extra-
     15 ordinary wisdom have been found in thee.     Now the wise men,
        magians, gazarenes have come in before me to read that writ-
        ing and make known to me the meaning of it, but they are not
     16 able to tell me. But I have heard of thee that thou canst solve
        difficulties.Now therefore if thou canst read that writing and
        explain to me the meaning of it, thou shalt be clothed in pur-
        ple and have a chain of gold for thy neck and be a chief, third
                                   DANIEL.
       Ch. V.
       17 in rank, in my kingdom.     Then Daniel said before the king,
          Let thy gifts be thine own, and give to another the honour of
          thy household ; but the writing I will read, and I will explain
       18 to thee the meaning of it.    king, God, the Most High gave to
          Nabuchodonosar thy father this kingdom and majesty and glo-
       19 ry and honour.   And because of the majesty which he gave him,
          all the peoples, tribes and languages trembled and were struck
          with awe at his presence.   Whom he would he slew, and whom
          he would he smote, and whom he would he set up, and whom
       20 he would he put down.    But when his heart became elated and
          his spirit emboldened to shew its arrogance, he was deposed
          from the throne of his kingdom and his glory was taken from
       21 him; and he was driven from among men; and his heart was
          disposed to associate with the beasts ; and his dwelling was with
          the wild asses ; and he was fed with grass like an ox ; and his
          body was bathed with the dew of heaven, till he was made to
          know that the Most High God ruleth over the kingdom of
          men and can give it to whom he will.
       22     Now thou, Baltasar, his son, hast not therefore humbled thy
       2o heart before this God.  Hast thou not known all these things ?
          Yet thou hast exalted thyself against the Lord God of heaven.
          And the vessels of his house have been brought before thee,
          and thou and thy nobles and thy concubines and thy wives
          have drunk wine out of them, and thou hast praised the gods
          of srold and silver and brass and iron and wood and stone
          which neither see nor hear, nor understand : but the God in
          whose hand is thy breath and all thy ways—him thou hast not
       24 glorified. For this cause a joint of a hand hath been sent from
       25 his presence, and it hath sketched this writing.Nowthis is what
       26 is written, Mane, Thekel, Phares. The interpretation of the de-
       27 cree is this.  Mane; God hath measured thy kingdom and
       28 brought it to a conclusion.  Thekel—It hath been weighed in a
          balance and found wanting.     Phares—Thy kingdom is taken
          away and given to Medes and Persians.
       29     Then Baltasar gave orders and they clothed Daniel with
          purple and put a chain of gold about his neck, and proclama-
          tion was made concerning him that he was a chief, third in
       30 rank, in the kingdom.   And that very night Baltasar the Chal-
                                                                                                                                              ;;;
                  VI.
         Ch.                                                      DANIEL.
                dean king was slain, and Darius the Mede assumed the king-
                dom, being sixty two years of age.
         VI.             IT having seemed good in the sight of Darius, he set
                over the kingdom a hundred and twenty satraps to be govern-
           *2   ors of provinces throughout his whole dominion ; and over
                these he appointed three ministers of whom Daniel was one
                that the governors might render an account to them, so that the
            3 king might not be oppressed with business.                                                       And Daniel was
                at the head of these.                           Because there was in him an extraordi-
            4 nary spirit and the king had set him over his whole kingdom,
                therefore the ministers and the governors sought to find some
                pretext against Daniel.                              And when they found no pretext,
                lapse or crime with which to charge him, for he was faithful
            5 the ministers said, We shall not find any pretext against Da-
            6 niel except in the ceremonies relating to his God.                                                            Then the
                ministers and the governors waited on the king, and said to
            7 him, King Darius live forever !                                        All that are over thy king-
                dom, the generals and governors, the chief commanders and
                toparchs have joined in opinion to establish by a royal statute
                and make a firm decree, that whoever shall make any request
                of any god or man for thirty days, save of thee only,                                                               king
            8 he shall be cast into the den of the lions.                                                     Now therefore,
                king, establish the edict and promulgate it in writing, that the
                decree of the Persians and Medes may not be dispensed with.
            9 Upon this Darius the king ordered the decree to be written.
          10            Now when Daniel knew that the decree was passed, he
                 went home and the windows in his upper chamber towards
                 Jerusalem were opened for him, and three times a day, kneel-
                 ing down on his knees, he prayed and gave thanks before his
                 God as he had done heretofore.
          11            Now those men watched and having found Daniel prais-
          12 ing and supplicating his God, they went and said to the king,
                       king, hast thou not passed an edict, that every man who
                 shall make any request of any god or man for the space of
                 thirty days save of thee only,                                        king, shall be cast into the
                 den of the lions ?                    And the king said, It is true ; and the decree
          13 of the Medes and Persians cannot be altered.                                                         Then they an-
                 swered and said before the king, Daniel, who is one of the
              VI.                       DANIEL.
          Ch.
             captives from Juda, hath not paid obedience to thy decree.
         14 For three times a day he maketh requests of his God.           When
             the king heard this matter he was exceedingly grieved for it
             and strove hard for Daniel to save him and continued till evening
         15 his endeavours to deliver him.     Then the men said to the king,
             Know,      king, that it is decreed by the Medes and Persians,
             That no edict or statute which the king shall pass must be dis-
         16 pensed with.     Then the king gave orders and they brought
             Daniel and threw him into the lions' clen.      And the king said
             to Daniel, Thy God whom thou servest continually will him-
         17 self deliver thee.   And when they had brought a stone and put
             it on the mouth of the den, the king caused it to be sealed
             with his own signet and with the signet of his nobles that no-
         18 thing might be altered in respect to Daniel.         Then the king-
             went to his house and retired to bed without supper.            And
             there was no food brought to him and sleep went from him.
             But God shut the mouths of the lions so that they did not mo-
         19 lest Daniel.   And in the morning the king arose soon as it was
         20 light and went in haste to the lions' den.        And when he ap-
             proached the den, he cried with a loud voice,           Daniel, the
             servant of the living God, hath thy God, whom thou servest
             continually, been able to deliver thee from the mouths of the
         21 lions?   Thereupon Daniel said to the king,           king live for-
         22 ever !  My God sent his angel and shut the mouths of the lions
             and they have not hurt me.         For before him rectitude was
            found in me; and even in thy sight,          king, I have commit-
         23 ted no offence.   At this the king was exceedingly rejoiced and
             gave order to take Daniel up out of the den.       So he was taken
            up out of the den and there was no manner of hurt found on
         24 him, because he had trusted in his God.        Then the king com-
            manded and they brought the men who had accused Daniel,
            and they and their sons and their wives were cast into the den
            of the lions.   And before they reached the bottom of the den
            the lions had such mastery over them that they broke all their
         25 bones.   Then Darius the king wrote—To all the peoples, tribes
            and languages who dwell in the whole earth, Peace be multi-
         26 plied to you.   From my presence this decree is established, that
            in every government of my kingdom men tremble and be
            struck with awe at the presence of the God of Daniel ; for he
                                    DANIEL.
    Ch. VII.
        is  the living God and endureth forever, and his kingdom
        can never be destroyed and his dominion will be to the end.
    27 He supporteth and delivereth and doth signs and wonders in
        heaven and on earth.     He it is who hath delivered Daniel from
        the power of the lions.
    28      So Daniel prospered in the reign of Darius and in the reign
        of Cyrus the Persian.
    VII.      In the first year of Baltasar king of the Chaldeans, Da-
        niel had a dream and these were the visions of his head on his
        bed and he wrote down this dream of his.
     2      I Daniel beheld, and lo ! the four winds of heaven blew
      3 violently on the great sea ; and four great beasts came up out
      4 of the sea, different one from the other.       The first was like a
        lioness, and had wings like those of an eagle.      I beheld till her
        wings were plucked off ; and she was raised from the earth and
        stood on the feet of a man and a man's heart was given her.
     5 And behold the second beast was like a bear ; and it stood half
        erect and there were three ribs in its mouth between its teeth,
     6 and they said to it thus, " Arise, devour much flesh."            After
        this I looked, and lo ! another beast like a leopard ; and it had
        four wings of a bird on it ; and this beast had four heads and
     7 to it dominion was given.      After this I beheld, and lo ! a fourth
        beast, dreadful and terrible, exceedingly strong and its teeth
        of iron !  It devoured and brake in pieces ! and the residue it
        trampled with its feet.     Now this was far different from all the
     8 beasts which were before it and it had ten horns.           I attended
        to its horns, and behold another little horn sprouted up in the
        midst of them ; and three of the horns which were before
        it were rooted out from before it.        And behold in this horn
        there were eyes like the eyes of a man and a mouth speaking
     9 great things.    And I beheld till the thrones were set and an an-
        cient  of days was seated,       xlnd his garment was white as
    10 snow and the hair of his head was like pure wool.          His throne
        was a flame of fire and his wheels a blazing fire.    A river of fire
        rolled before him.     Thousands of thousands ministered to him
    11 and myriads of myriads waited on him.             The court sat and
        books were opened.       I looked then because of the sound of
        the great words which that horn had spoken, until the beast
            VOL. II.                     4 L
              VII.                     DANIEL.
         Ch.
             was slain and destroyed and its body given to be burned
         12 with fire.   And the government of the rest of the beasts was
             changed and a length of time given them until a time and a
          13 time.   And I beheld in the vision of the night, and lo ! with
             the clouds of heaven one like a son of man coming !        And he
             advanced to the Ancient of days and was introduced to him.
          14 And to him was given the government and the honour and the
             kingdom ; and all the peoples, tribes and languages are to
             serve him.    His dominion is an everlasting dominion, which
             shall never pass away, and his kingdom shall not be destroyed.
          15     As for me, Daniel, my spirit quivered in my whole frame
          16 and the vision of my head troubled me.        And I went to one
             of them in waiting and made diligent inquiry to learn of
             him concerning all these things and he gave me exact in-
             formation and explained to me the meaning of these things.
          17 These beasts, which are four, denote that four kingdoms shall
          18 be raised up on the earth.      These shall be removed, and the
              holy ones of the Most High shall take the kingdom and hold it
              to an age of the ages.
          19        Then I inquired particularly concerning the fourth
              beast, because it was different from every beast, exceedingly
              dreadful.  Its teeth were of iron and its claws of brass.   It de-
              voured and brake in pieces and the residue it trampled with
          20 its feet.   And concerning the ten horns, which were on its
              head, and that other, which sprouted up and shook off some of
              the first; and which had eyes and a mouth speaking great
              things and the appearance of which was greater than the rest,
          21 I beheld and that horn made war on the holy ones and pre-
          22 vailed against them until the Ancient of days came and gave
              judgment for the holy ones of the Most High, and the time
          23 came and the holy ones possessed the kingdom.         And he said,
              With regard to the fourth beast, there shall be a fourth king-
              dom on the earth which shall surpass all the kingdoms and
           24 devour all the earth and trample down and cut to pieces.      And
              its ten horns denote that ten kingdoms shall be raised up ; and
              after them another shall be raised up which shall exceed in
           25 evils all those before and shall humble three kings and shall
              speak words against the Most High and wear out the holy ones
              of the Most High and think of changing times and law, and
                                                                                                                         ;
       Ch. VIII.                                       DANIEL.
            this shall be put in its power for a time and times and the half
       26 of a time.             When the court hath sat they will change this go-
      27 vernment to abolish and destroy it utterly.                                        For the kingdom
            and the dominion and the majesty of the kings who are under
             the whole heaven, is given to the holy ones of the Most High.
            And his kingdom shall be an everlasting kingdom, and all
            the governments shall serve and obey him.                                     To this is the end
            of this word.
       28         As for me, Daniel, my thoughts troubled me much and
             my countenance was changed.                            But I kept the matter in mine
             own heart.
       VIII.            IN the third year of Baltasar the king a vision appear-
         2 ed to me.             After the first vision which appeared to me, I Da-
             niel was at Susoi the palace which is in the province of Ailam
         3 and being on the bank of the Oubal, I lifted up mine eyes and
             looked, and lo a ram stood before the Oubal and it had lofty
             horns and one was higher than the other; and the highest
         4 sprang up last.                And I saw the ram butting westward and north-
             ward and southward, and of all the beasts none could stand be-
             fore him nor was there any to deliver out of his hand.                                              So he
         5 acted according to his pleasure and became great.                                            And while
             I was considering, behold a he-goat came from the south west
             over the face of the whole earth and he did not seem to touch
         6 the ground.               And the goat had a horn between his eyes.                                     And
             he came to the ram which had two horns and which I saw
             standing before the Oubal and ran up to him with all his might.
         7 I saw him indeed coming up to the ram and he was exasper-
             ated against him, and he smote the ram and broke his two
             horns and the ram had not power to stand before him.                                                So he
             threw him on the ground and trampled him, and there was
         8 none to deliver the ram out of his hand.                                   And the goat of the
             goats became very great and when he was in full strength,
             that great horn of his was broken ; and four others sprang up
          9 from under it towards the four winds of heaven.                                                 And out
             from the first of them there came forth one strong horn
        10 which became very great towards the south and towards the
              host, and its greatness reached even to the host of heaven.
              And there fell on the earth some of the host of heaven and
                                                                                                                      ;
              Ch. VIII.                                    DANIEL.
              11 some of the stars, and these were trodden down.                                       And until
                   the captain general should deliver the captivity, even by rea-
                   son of him the sacrifice was disturbed; and he was prosper-
              12 ed ; and the sanctuary is to be desolated ; and sin was permitted
                   against the sacrifice ; and this righteousness was cast on the
              13 ground ; so he acted and was prospered.                               And I heard a holy
                   one speaking ; and a holy one said to the Phelmoni who spoke,
                   " How long shall this vision last, respecting the sacrifice which
                   is taken away, and the sin of desolation which is permitted
              14 and the sanctuary and the host be trodden down ? "                                        And he
                   said to him, Even till there shall be of an evening and a morn-
                   ing two thousand four hundred days.                         Then shall the sanctuary
                   be cleansed.
              15         And when I Daniel had seen the vision and sought the
                   meaning, then lo ! there stood before me an appearance like
              16 that of a man.              And I heard a voice of a man amidst the Ou-
                   bal and it called and said, " Gabriel, instruct him respecting
              17 the vision."            So he came and stood near where I was stand-
                   ing.     And when he came, I was struck with terror and fell on
                   my face.         And he said to me, Son of man, understand; for
              18 this vision also is for the end of a time.                               And while he was
                   speaking to me, I fell flat with my face on the ground.                                     Then
              19 he touched me and set me on my feet, and said, Behold I make
                   known to thee the things which shall be in the last days of the
             20 indignation ; for this vision also is for the end of a time.                                     The
                   ram which thou sawest which had the horns, is the king of
             21 the Medes and Persians.                     The goat of the goats, is the king of
                   the Grecians; and the great horn which was between his eyes
              22 is the first king.              Now as upon this being broken, four horns
                   shot up from under it, four kings of that nation of his will
             23 be raised up, but not by their own might.                                  And in the last
                   days of their kingdom, their sins being come to the full, a
                   king will be raised up of an unblushing countenance, skilled
             24 in problems, and his power will be great, and he will destroy
                   things which are objects of admiration and will prosper and
             25 act and destroy mighty men, and a holy people.                                   And the yoke
                   of his chain will prosper; and by his hand and by his heart,
                   deceit will be magnified, and with deceit he will destroy many
                   and for the destruction of many he will be raised up and will
                                                               ——
       IX.                    DANIEL.
   Ch.
   26 break them like eggs with his hands.  Now the vision of the
      evening and the morning, which was mentioned is true.  Seal
      thou therefore the vision, for it is for many days.
   27     Upon this I Daniel was confined to my bed and sick.
      And when I arose I did the king's business. And I was asto-
      nished at the vision ; but none understood it.
   IX.     IN the first year of Darius, the son of Assuerus of the
    2 seed of the Medes, who reigned over the kingdom of the Chal-
      deans, I Daniel understood by the books that the number of
      the years, which was a word of the Lord to Jeremias the pro-
      phet, for the accomplishment of the desolation of Jerusalem,
    3 was seventy years.  Therefore I turned my face to the Lord
      my God, to seek a prayer and supplication by fasting and
    4 sackcloth.  And I prayed to the Lord my God and made con-
       fession and said,  Lord, the God great and marvellous, who
       keepest thy covenant and thy mercy for them who love thee
     5 and keep thy commandments !  We have sinned ; we have com-
       mitted iniquity; we have transgressed and apostatised and
       turned away from thy commandments, and from thy judg-
     6 ments, and have not hearkened to thy servants the prophets
       who spoke in thy name to our kings and our chiefs and our
     7 fathers and to all the people of the land.To thee,Lord, be-
       longeth righteousness ; but to us confusion of face as at this
       day—to the man Juda and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem and
       to all Israel—and to those near and to them far off, in every
       land where thou hast scattered them for their breach of cove-
     8 nant of which they have been guilty. In thee,  Lord, is our
       righteousness.Though to us belongeth confusion of face
       to - our kings, and our chiefs and our fathers, who have sinned
     9 against thee: with the Lord our God are tender mercies and
    10 forgivenesses.Because we apostatised and did not hearken to
       the voice of the Lord our God, to walk in his laws which he
       set before us by the ministry of his servants the prophets ;
    11 and all Israel transgressed thy law, and declined to hearken to
       thy voice ; therefore upon us came the curse and the execra-
       tion which is written in the law of Closes the servant of God.
    12 Because we sinned against him, therefore he confirmed his
       words which he spoke against us and against our judges who
                                                                                                                      ;;
              Ch. IX.                                      DANIEL.
                   judged us, by bringing upon us great evils, such as never
                   happened under the whole heaven ; as was the case in Jerusa-
              13 lem.        According to what is written in the law of Moses all
                   those evils have come upon us.                      We indeed did not supplicate
                   the favour of the Lord our God, by turning from all our wick-
                   edness, therefore that we might be made sensible of all thy
              14 truth, the Lord hath indeed been watchful and hath brought
                   upon us these things.                 For the Lord our God is righteous in
                   every act of his which he hath done, and we have not hearkened
                   to his voice.
              15        Now,           Lord our God, who broughtest thy people out of
                   the land of Egypt with a strong hand and who hast made thy-
                   self a great name as at this day ; we have sinned, we have com-
              16 mitted iniquity.              Mercy,          Lord, is thine in all things ; let thy
                   wrath, I beseech thee, be turned away and thine indignation
                   from thy city Jerusalem, thy holy mountain.                              Because we have
                   sinned, therefore for our iniquities and the iniquities of our fa-
                   thers, Jerusalem and thy people are become an object of re-
              17 proach among all those around us.                          But now,            Lord our God,
                   hearken to the prayer of thy servant and to his supplications
              18 and let thy face shine upon thy sanctuary which is desolate.
                   For thine own sake,                  Lord, incline,            my God, thine ear and
                   hear.      Open thine eyes and behold our desolation and that of
                   thy city which is called by thy name.                           For we do not for our
                   own righteousness present our piteous case before thee; but
                   we cast ourselves upon thy tender mercies,                                 Lord, which are
              19 many.              Lord hear !              Lord, be appeased !             Attend,          Lord !
                   Defer not,           my God, for thine own sake ! for thy city and thy
                   people are called by thy name.
              20         Now whilst I was still speaking and praying and confessing
                   mine own sins and the sins of my people Israel, and present-
                   ing my supplication before the Lord my God for the mount
              21 of the sanctuary ; even whilst I was uttering this prayer, be-
                   hold a man, Gabriel, whom I saw in the former vision, came
                   flying and touched me about the hour of the evening sacrifice
              22 and instructed me and conversed with me and said, Daniel, I
              23 am now come to teach thee knowledge.                                 At the beginning of
                   thy supplication a word went forth, and I am come to tell thee
                   for thou art a man greatly beloved.                       Be instructed therefore by
                                     DANIEL.
     Ch. X.
     24 the decree, and understand by the vision.        Seventy weeks are
         set apart for thy people and for the holy city ; for finishing sin
         offerings, and for sealing up sin offerings ; and blotting out in-
         iquities, and making atonement for iniquities ; and for bring-
         ing in an everlasting righteousness ; and for sealing vision and
     25 prophet ; and for anointing the Holy of Holies.       Therefore thou
         art to know and understand, that from the going forth of a
         word for returning an answer and for building Jerusalem un-
         til an Anointed ruler are seven weeks, and sixty two weeks.
         They shall indeed return and a street shall be built and a wall,
     26 and these times shall be emptied out, and after the sixty two
         weeks, the Messiah shall be cut off, though there is no crime
         in him ; and he, with the ruler who is coming, will destroy the
         city and the sanctuary.    They shall be destroyed with a deluge,
        and even to the end of the war determined on in course, with
     27 desolations.   Now one week shall confirm a covenant for many
        and in the half of that week my sacrifice and libation shall be
        taken away.     And upon the temple shall be an abomination of
        the desolations, and at the end of a time, an end shall be put
        to that desolation.
     X.     IN the third year of Cyrus, king of the Persians, a word was
        revealed to Daniel, surnamed Baltasar.        And the word is true
        and great power and knowledge was given him by the vision.
      2 In those days, I Daniel, had been mourning three weeks.         I had
      3 not eaten palatable bread, nor had flesh or wine entered my
      4 mouth, neither had I anointed myself to the full end of three
        weeks.    On the twenty fourth of the first month when I was on
      5 the bank of the great river, namely, Tigris Eddekel, I raised
        mine eyes and looked, and lo ! a man clothed with a flowing
      6 robe and his loins girded with gold of Ophaz, and his body
        like a Tharsis, and his face like the appearance of lightning,
        and his eyes like lamps of fire, and his arms and his legs like
        the appearance of sparkling brass, and the sound of his words
        like the sound of a multitude.
      7     Now, I Daniel alone saw this vision.        The men who were
        with me did not see it ; but great consternation fell upon them
      8 and they fled for fear ; so I was left alone.   And when I beheld
        this great vision, there was no strength left in me.       Even my
                                  —                                                                                                           :
                          XI.                                           DANIEL.
                 Ch.
                        comeliness was changed into corruption and I retained no
                    9 strength ; but I heard the sound of his words.                                                   And when I
                        heard him, I was struck with awe, and my face was on the
                 10 ground.               And lo ! a hand touched me and raised me up upon
                 11 my knees.                  And he said to me, Daniel, man greatly beloved,
                        gain knowledge by the words which I speak to thee and stand
                        up ; for I am now sent to thee.                              And when he said this to me
                 12 I stood up trembling.                             Then he said to me, Fear not, Daniel
                        for from the first day that thou didst set thy heart to gain
                        knowledge and afflict thyself before the Lord thy God, thy
                 13 words were heard, and I came at thy words ; but the chief
                        of the kingdom of the Persians stood in my way twenty one
                       days, when lo !                  Michael the first of the chiefs came to help
                       me, and I left him there with the chief of the kingdom of the
                 14 Persians, and am come to teach thee what will befal thy
                       people in the last days.                             Because this vision is for days to
                        come.
                 15           Now while he was speaking to me in such terms, I turned
                       my countenance to the earth, and was in amaze ; and behold
                 16 a likeness as it were of a son of man touched my lips, where-
                        upon I opened my mouth, and spoke and said to him who
                       was standing before me,                              my lord, at the sight of thee my
                        vitals are changed, and I have no strength ; how then can thy
                 17 servant,               my lord, speak with this my lord ?                                   As for me, from
                       that moment my strength could not support me and there was
                 18 no spirit left in me.                         Then an appearance like that of a man
                       touched me again, and strengthened me and said to me, Man
                       much beloved, fear not : peace be to thee.                                       Take courage and be
                 19 strong.             And when he had spoken to me I recovered strength
                       and said, Let my lord speak, for thou hast strengthened me.
                 20 Then he said,                       that thou knewest that for which I came to
                       thee, then would I return to fight for the chief of the Persians,
                 21 for as I was coming, the chief of the Grecians came.                                                           But I
                       will tell thee that only which is ordered in a writing of truth.
                       There is indeed none with me solicitous about him, but only
                       Michael your chief.                      As for me, I in the first year of Cyrus,
                 XL            was his strength and power.                                  And now I will tell the
                   2 truth : Behold yet three kings shall be raised up in Persia,
                                                                                                                                    ;
              XL                                              DANIEL.
      Ch.
            and the fourth shall abound in great wealth above all.                                                          And
             after he hath gotten this his great wealth he will be stirred up
        3 against all the kingdoms of the Greeks.                                                 But there will be
            raised up a mighty king who will be lord of a great dominion
        4 and will do according to his pleasure.                                               But as soon as his
             kingdom hath been set up, it will be broken in pieces and di-
             vided towards the four winds of heaven, but not to his utmost
             bounds, nor according to his dominion which he ruled.                                                            For
             his kingdom will be torn to pieces, and given to others be-
        5 sides these.                 And the king of the south will grow strong
             and one of these chiefs will grow strong against him, and will
        6 rule over a great dominion.                                     And after his years they will
             come to an agreement.                          And a daughter of a king of the south
             will come to a king of the north for the purpose of making
             leagues with him.                    But he will not retain strength of arm, nor
             shall his seed stand ; for she will be delivered up and they who
             bring her, both the young woman, and he who strengthen-
         7 eth her in those times.                             Out of the blossom of her root one
             having a government of his own will be raised up, and will
             come to this power, and enter the strong holds of the king of
         8 the north, and perform exploits in them and prevail.                                                        And he
             will carry their gods with their molten images, all his preci-
             ous vessels of silver and gold, with captives to Egypt; and
         9 he will stand above the king of the north who will come to
             the kingdom of the king of the south ; and return again to
       10 his own land.                     But his sons will collect a multitude among
             many, and one will come with effect, and like a deluge, and
             will pass through and establish himself and the war will be
       11 carried even to his fortress.                                Then will the king of the south
             be furiously enraged, and he will come out and fight the king
             of the north, who will array a great multitude, but this mul-
       12 titude will be delivered into his hand.                                              And when he shall
             take this multitude, his heart will be elated, and he will over-
       13 throw myriads, but will not prevail.                                       For the king of the north
              will return, and bring a multitude greater than the former and
             at the end of times of years invade the frontiers with a great
       14 army, and with much wealth.                                      And in those times many will
              rise up against the king of the south, and the sons of the pests
              of thy people will be stirred up to establish a phantom, but
                    VOL. n.                                           4 M
                                                                                                                                 ;
                         XL                                     DANIEL.
                 Ch.
                 15 they will be weak.                   For a king of the north will come and cast
                       np a mount and take strong cities.                               Though the arms of the
                       king of the south will make a stand, and his chosen men will
                 16 be raised up, yet there will not be power to withstand.                                                    So
                      that he who cometh against him, will do according to his
                      pleasure, and there is none able to stand before him.                                             So he
                      will stand in the land of Sabei, and it will be perfected by his
                 17 hand.           Then he will set his face to enter with the strength of
                      his whole kingdom, and will settle all things equitably with
                      him, and will give him a daughter of the women with a view
                      to corrupt her, but she will not continue in his interest, nor
                18 be for him.              Then he will turn his face to the islands, and take
                      many, and cause chiefs to cease their reproaches : but his own
                19 reproach will be turned upon him.                                 Then he will turn his face
                      to the strength of his own land, and will be weak and fall, and
                20 will not be found.                     And from his root there will be set upon
                      his throne a plant of royalty plundering, and taxing the glory
                      of a kingdom.               And in those days he also will be destroyed,
                21 but not with open violence nor in battle.                                       And on his throne
                      one will be settled, who was despised and on whom they did
                      not confer the honour of a kingdom.                                  But he will come to it
                22 peaceably and obtain the kingdom by obsequiousness.                                                      And
                      the arms of the overwhelmer will be overwhelmed at his pre-
                23 sence, and they with the ruler of the covenant will be destroy-
                      ed.      Because of the associations against him, he will practise
                      guile and come up and overpower them with a small nation and
                24 come peaceably into rich provinces, and do what neither his
                      fathers, nor his fathers' fathers ever did.                                 Plunder and spoils
                      and wealth he will scatter among them ; and against Egypt he
                25 will forecast devices even for a time.                                 And his power and his
                      heart will be stirred up against a king of the south, with a
                      great army ; and the king of the south will join battle with an
                26 exceeding great and powerful army ; but they will not stand
                      for they will form devices against him and devour his substance
                      and crush him, and armies will be overwhelmed, and many
                27 wounded shall fall.                   Then both the kings with their hearts bent
                      on mischief will speak lies at one table.                            But it will not prosper.
                28 Because an end is still put off for a time, therefore he will return
                      to his own land with much wealth and his heart will be against
   Ch. XL                    DANIEL.
      the holy covenant, and he will act and return to his own land.
   29 At the time he will return and come to the south ; but this
   30 last expedition will not be like the first : for the Kitians who
      set out at the same time will arrive, and he will be humbled.
      Then he will return and will be inflamed with wrath against
      the holy covenant.  And he will act and return and keep up
      an intelligence with them who have forsaken the holy cove-
   31 nant.  And seeds out of him will spring up, and the sanctu-
      ary of the dominion will be polluted; and the daily sacrifice
      will be removed ; and there will be set up an abomination
   32 which hath caused desolation, which they who break cove-
      nant will bring in by flatteries.But the people who acknow-
   33 ledge their God will take courage and act. And the men of
      understanding among the people will keep up an intelligence
      for many purposes ; but they will be weakened by sword and
   34 by fire, and by captivity, and by plundering, for days.And
      when they are weak, they will be helped with a little help.
   35 And many will join them by flatteries.Then some of the wise
      will be weak that they may be tried and chosen, and that at
   36 a time the end may be revealed.  Because it is still for a time,
      therefore he will act according to his pleasure.And this king
      will be exalted and magnified above every god, and will speak
      swelling words, and prosper until the indignation is completed :
   37 for it is coming to a completion.Though with all the gods of
      his fathers, he will not keep up any intelligence, including
      even the desire of women—though he will not pay respect
      to any thing divine, because he will magnify himself above
   38 them all, yet in his place he will glorify god Maozim—even
      a god which his fathers knew not, he will glorify with gold
      and silver, and precious stones, and with desirable things, and
   39 act for the fortresses of them who have taken refuge with a
      strange God, and he will multiply glory and subject many to
   40 them and distribute lands for gifts.And at the end of a time
      there will be conflicts with the king of the south, and against
      him there will be brought a king of the north, with chariots
      and horsemen, and many ships, which shall invade the land,
   41 and he will break in pieces and pass through and come to the
      land of Sabaim, and many will be weak. But these will escape
      out of his hand, namely, Edom and Moab and the children
               XII.
          Ch.                             DANIEL.
          42 of Arumon. And he will stretch forth his hand against this
          43 land, and the land of Egypt will be no security.          And he will
              be master of the hidden stores of gold and silver, and of all
              the desirable things of Egypt, and of the Lybians and Ethi-
          44 opians, in their strong holds.      And when reports and disturb-
              ances shall trouble him from the east, and from the north,
          45 he will then come with great wrath to destroy many, and he
              will pitch his tent at Ephadanus between the seas on the holy
              mountain Sabaim.      Then he will come to his portion, and there
              is none to deliver him.
          XII.      And at that time Michael the great chief, who hath been
              over the children of thy people will stand up, and there will
              be a time of tribulation—a tribulation such as hath not been
              since there was a nation on the earth even to this time.      At that
              time all thy people who are enrolled in the book shall be saved.
           2 And many of them who sleep in mounds of earth shall be
              raised up, some for everlasting life and some for disgrace and
           3 everlasting shame.     And they who are wise shall shine like
              the brightness of the firmament, and some of the many right-
              eous like the stars for the ages and longer.
           4     As for thee, Daniel, shut up these words and seal the book
              till the time of accomplishment ; until many be taught and
              knowledge abound.
           5      Then I Daniel looked, and lo ! two others stood, one on
              this bank of the river and the other on the other bank of the
           6 river.   And one said to the man clothed with the flowing robes
              who was over the water of the river, How long to the end of
           7 these wonderful things which thou hast spoken ?          And I heard
              the man clothed with the fine robes who was over the water
              of the river.   He lifted up his right and his left hand to heaven
              and sware by him who liveth forever and ever that it will be
              until a time of times and the half of a time.       When an end is
              put to the dispersion, they will know all these things.        As for
           8 me though I heard I did not understand.             So I said, Lord,
           9 What will be the issue of these things ? And he said, Come
              Daniel.   Because these words are shut up and sealed until the
          10 end of a time.     Though many be chosen and made white and
              purified and sanctified, and transgressors transgress;        yet no
              transgressor will understand but the prudent will understand.
     Ch. XII.                      DANIEL.
     11 Now from the time of the change of the daily sacrifice, when
         the abomination of desolation shall be set up there will be a
     12 thousand two hundred and ninety days.           Happy he who will
         wait and come to a thousand three hundred and thirty five
     13 days.   But as for thee, come and go to rest, for still there will
         be days and hours to the final accomplishment.      And thou shalt
         stand up for thy portion at the end of days.
                                    HOSEA.
     I.     A luorcl of the Lord which came to Hosea the son of Beeri
            in the days of Ozias and Joatham and Achaz and Ezekias
            kings of Juda, and in the days of Jeroboam son of Joas
            king ofIsrael.
            The beginning of the word of the Lord by Rosea.
      2   I.  WHEN the Lord said to Hosea, " Go, take thee a wife
         of whoredom, and children of whoredoms, since the land is
      3 going and will go a whoring from the Lord," he then went
         and took Gomer a daughter of Debelaim : and when she con-
      4 ceived and bore him a son, the Lord said to him, " Call his
         name Jezrael ; for yet a little while and I will avenge the blood
         of Jezrael on the house of Jehu, and cause the kingdom of the
      5 house of Israel to cease.   And it shall come to pass in that day
      6 that I will break the bow of Israel in the valley of Jezrael." And
         when she conceived again and bore a daughter, he said to him,
         "Call her name, Not-compassionated; for I will no longer con-
         tinue to have compassion on the house of Israel, but will set
      7 myself against them.      But on the children of Juda I will have
         compassion and I will save them by the Lord their God, and
         will not save them by bow nor by sword nor by battle nor by
         horses nor by horsemen."
      8     And when she had weaned Not-compassionaied, she con-
      9 ceived again and bore a son, and he said, " Call his name
        Not-my-people, since you are not my people and I am not your
     10 God." (Now the number of the children of Israel was like
        the sand of the sea which cannot be measured nor counted.)
                                                                          ":
         Ch. II.                     HOSEA.
            "But it shall come to pass that in the place where it was said
            to them, " You are not my people," they shall be called chil-
         li dren of the Living God, and the children of Juda and the
            children of Israel shall be gathered together and shall appoint
            for themselves one head and come up out of the land.   Because
        II.  great will be the day of Jezrael ; say ye to your brother, Mypeo-
          2 pie, and to your sister, Compassionated ; emplead your mother,
            emplead, because with regard to her, is she not my wife ? And as
            for me, am not I her husband ? Therefore I will remove her forni-
            cation from before me and her adultery from between her breasts.
          3 That I may do this I will strip her naked, and reduce her to
            the state she was in at her birth.I will indeed make her deso-
            late, and order her to a land without water and kill her with
         4 thirst, and on her children I will not have compassion.     Be-
          5 cause they are children of fornication—because their mother
            hath committed whoredom—she, who brought them forth
            hath acted shamefully—because she said, " I will go after my
            lovers, who give me my bread and my water, and my apparel
            and my fine linens, mine oil and all things convenient for me ;
          6 for this behold I will hedge up her way with thorns ; and block
          7 up her ways that she may not find her path.   Though she fol-
            low her lovers she shall not overtake them ; though she seek
            them, she shall not find them.   Then she will say, " I will go
            and return to my former husband, for it was then better with
          8 me than now.    She indeed did not acknowledge that I gave
            her the corn and wine and oil ; and multiplied silver for her
          9 but she made ornaments of gold and silver for Baal : there-
            fore I will turn and take away my corn in its season, and my
            wine in its appointed time ; and I will take away my garments
            and my fine linens, that she may not cover her nakedness :
        10 and I will now disclose her impurity before her lovers ; and
         11 none shall deliver her out of my hand.     I will indeed turn
            away all her pleasures, her festivals, and her new moons and
         12 her sabbaths and all her solemn assemblies.    And I will lay
            waste her vineyards and her fig orchards—all those things re-
            specting which she said, "These are my rewards which my
            lovers gave me ; " and I will make them for a memorial ; and
            the wild beasts of the field and the birds of the air, and the
       5
     CL III.                              HOSEA.
     13 reptiles of the earth shall devour them.             And I will punish her
         for the days of the hakims in which she sacrificed to them.
              When she had put on her ear-rings and her jewels, she went
     14 after her lovers and forgot me, saith the Lord ; therefore behold
         I will cause her to wander, and order her to a wilderness and
     1   speak to her heart.       And thence I will give her for her posses-
         sions, even the valley of Achor to open her understanding : and
         she shall be humbled there as in the days of her youth, even as
     16 in the days of her coming up out of the land of Egypt.                   And it
         shall come to pass in that day, saith the Lord, that she will call
     17 me My husband; and no more call me Baalim. I will indeed
         take away the names of the Baalims out of her mouth, and their
     18 names shall no more be mentioned.                  And in that day I will
         make a covenant for them, with the wild beasts of the field and
         the birds of the air and the reptiles of the earth ; and bow and
         sword and battle I will crush out of the land ; and I will settle
     19 thee securely and betroth thee to myself forever.                I will indeed
         betroth thee to myself by righteousness and by judgment and by
     20 compassion and by tender mercies : and I will betroth thee to
     21 myself by fidelity ; and thou shalt acknowledge the Lord.                  And
         it shall come to pass in that day, saith the Lord, that I will
     22 hearken to the heaven, and it shall hearken to the earth, and
         the earth shall hear the corn and the wine and the oil, and they
     23 shall hearken to Jezrael ;        and I will plant her for myself in the
         land, and love her who was not beloved; and to them who
         were not my people I will say, " Thou art my people : " and they
         will say, Thou the Lord art my God.
     III.      II.   xlgain the Lord said to me, Still go and love a wo-
         man who loveth wickedness, even an adulteress, as God loveth
         the children of Israel, though they look to strange gods and
      2 love cakes with dried grapes.            So I hired one for myself for fif-
         teen pieces of silver and a gomar of barley and a nebel of wine,
      3 and said to her, " Thou shalt continue many days for me and
         shalt not play the harlot nor have commerce with man, then I
       4 will be for thee ; for the children of Israel shall continue many
         days without a king and without a chief, and without a sacri-
          fice and without an altar and without a priesthood, and with-
       5 out manifestations; and afterwards the children of Israel will
         return and seek the Lord their God, and David their king;
                                                                                                                                 !;:
                       IY.                                       HOSEA.
                Ch.
                      and will be amazed at the Lord and at his goodness in the last
                      days.
                IY.          III.       (p)      Hear a word of the Lord,                         children of Israel
                      the Lord hath a controversy with the inhabitants of this land
                     because there is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God
                  2 in the land—Cursing and lying and murder and theft and
                     adultery are burst out on the land, and blood mingleth with
                  3 blood ; therefore the land shall mourn and be wasted with all its
                     inhabitants, with the wild beasts of the fields and with the rep-
                     tiles of the earth, and with the birds of the air.                                 Even the fishes
                     of the sea shall fail.
                  4         (J)     In order that none may be judged, that none may re-
                      prove, this people of mine shall be like a contradicted priest, and
                  5 shall be weak for years ; and with thee the prophet shall be without
                     strength.          I have compared thy mother to the night : my people
                  6 is like one that hath not knowledge : because thou hast rejected
                     knowledge, therefore I will reject thee from being my priest
                      as thou hast forgotten the law of thy God ; I also will forget
                  7 thy children. In proportion to their increase they sinned against
                  8 me; I will turn their glory into shame.                                   Shall they eat the sin
                      offerings of my people and by their iniquities support their
                  9 lives ? It shall indeed be that as is the people so shall be the
                     priest ; I will punish them for their ways and retribute to him
                10 his devices.              Though they eat they shall not be filled, they
                11 have committed fornications, and they cannot prosper.                                             Because
                      they forsook the Lord, to attend to fornication and wine, there-
                12 fore the heart of my people embraced drunkenness.                                             They con-
                      sulted by symbols and gave them answers by their staves.                                               By
                      a spirit of fornication they were led astray ; and they went a
                13 whoring from their God.                           They sacrificed on the tops of the
                      mountains, and on the hills they burned incense, under an oak
                     and a beech and a shady tree, because shade is good.                                           Eor this
                      cause your daughters will commit whoredom and your wives
                14 adultery ;            and I will not punish your daughters, when they
                     commit whoredom, nor your daughters in law when they com-
                      mit adultery.            Because they conversed with harlots and sacrificed
                                     (J)      Jehovah.                 (p)     The prophet speaks.
                                                                                                                          ;
                                                         HOSEA.
       Ch. V,
             with prostitutes, therefore my people, who were without un-
       15 clerstanding, were entangled with fornication.                                        As for thee, Is-
             rael, continue not in ignorance ; and thou Juda go not to Gal-
             gala.       Either go not up to the house of On, or swear not by the
       16 living Lord.                 Because Israel ran about madly like a heifer
             stung by a gad fly, the Lord will now feed them like a lamb in
       17 a roomy place.                  Ephraim associating with idols, laid stumbling
       18 blocks for himself.                    They addicted themselves to the Chanan-
             ites ; they went on in a continued course of whoredom ; they
       19 loved dishonour because of its revelry ; thou art a whirl of wind
             in its wings          butthey shall be put to shame because oftheir altars.
                                 ;
       V.          IV.       (p)       Hear these things ye priests; and attend ye
             house of Israel, and ye household of the king give ear; for
             against you is this indictment, because you are become a snare
             in the watch tower; and like a net spread upon Itaburion,
             which they who hunt wild beasts have fixed up.
         2         (J)       As for me, I was your instructed                                  I acknowledged
         3 Ephraim, when Israel did not withdraw from me.                                            Now because
         4 Ephraim went a whoring, Israel is polluted.                                     They did not apply
             their thoughts to return to their God. Because there is a spirit of
             whoredom in them, and they have not acknowledged the Lord,
         5 therefore the haughtiness of Israel shall be humbled at his
             presence, and Israel and Ephraim shall be weakened for their
             iniquities.           When Juda also shall be weakened with them,
          6 they will go with sheep and young bulls to seek the Lord, but
             they shall not find him, because he hath withdrawn from them.
         7 Because they have forsaken the Lord, because strange children
             have been born to them : the canker worm shall now devour
             them and their portions.
          8         (p)     Sound a trumpet on the mounts ; raise a shout on the
             high places ; proclaim in the house of On, Benjamin is con-
          9 founded.           Ephraim is become a desolation in the day of rebuke.
                    (J) Among the tribes of Israel I have given faithful warnings.
        10 The chiefs of Juda are become like the removers of bounda-
        11 ries, upon them I will pour out my fury like water.                                              Ephraim
              tyrannised over his adversary, he trampled down judgment
        12 because he set the example of going after vanities, therefore I
              will be like a terror to Ephraim, and like a goad to the house
                    VOL. II.                                    4 N
                                                                       —;
                                     HOSEA.
         Oh. VI. VII.
         13 of Juda.   When Ephraim saw his disorder and Juda felt his
            pain, though Ephraim went to the Assyrians, and sent ambas-
            sadors to king Iarim ; yet he could not heal you, nor could your
         14 pain be assuaged ; for I am like a panther to Ephraim, and like
            a lion to the house of Juda. When I tear, I will go and take
         15 andthereshall be no deliverer. I will sally forth and return to my
            place until they are made desolate, then they will seek my face.
         VI.    In their affliction they will seek me early, saying, " Come,
            let us return to the Lord our God, for it is he who hath torn
            and he can heal us.  He can smite, and into our wounds he can
          2 pour balm ; in two days he can restore us to health ; on the
          3 third day we shall be raised up and live before him.   Let us
            acknowledge—let us continue our pursuit to know the Lord
            sure as the morning we shall find him. He will come like rain
            for us ; like the former and latter rain for the earth."
          4    What shall I do for thee, Ephraim ?    What shall I do for
            thee, Juda ? As for your goodness, it was like a morning cloud
          5 like the transient dew of the morning : for this cause I mowed
            down your prophets, I slew them with the word of my mouth,
          6 and my judgment shall go forth as light ; for I desire mercy
            rather than sacrifice, and an acknowledgment of God rather
          7 than whole burnt offerings.   As for them, they are like man
            transgressing a covenant. There the city Galaad hath contemn-
          8 ed me ; it is a framer of vanities, a troubler of water, and thy
          9 strength was that of a mighty robber.   The priests concealed
         10 the way ; they acted the murder at Sikima.  Because they com-
            mitted iniquity in the house of Israel, I saw there the horrible for-
            nication of Ephraim. Israel is polluted. Now Juda begin an inga-
         11 thering for thyself. When I bring back the captivity of my peo-
         VII.     pie. WhenI have healed Israel, then shall be disclosed the
            iniquity of Ephraim and the wickedness of Samaria.    Because
            they have framed lies, therefore a thief shall come in to him, a
            sculking robber shall be in his way : that they may chime toge-
          2 ther like them who sing in unison.     I remembered all their
            wickedness, now their own devices have encompassed them.
          3 They were all open to my view.     They made kings glad by
          4 their wickedness and chiefs by their lies. They all burn with
            adultery, like an oven for baking cakes, which, after putting in
                                                                                                                        !;
      Ch. VIII.                                           HOSEA.
            the fire, after mixing the dough, is kept burning, till the dough
            is leavened.
        5         With regard to the days of your kings, the chiefs had be-
            gun to be inflamed with wine.                         He had stretched forth his hand
        6 with turbulent men.                     Because their hearts were heated like an
            oven, when they had revelled the whole night, Ephraim fell
            fast asleep.           The morning came, he was heated again like a
        7 flaming fire.             They were all hot as an oven and devoured their
           judges ; all their kings fell ; there was none among them who
        8 appealed to me.                     Ephraim was mingled among his tribes
            Ephraim was a cake under ashes, which had not been turned.
        9 Strangers devoured his strength and he did not know it ; grey
            hairs grew upon him and he did not perceive it.
      10          (p)      Though it was evident that the haughtiness of Israel
            would be humbled, yet they did not turn to the Lord their
            God, nor seek him diligently for all this.
      11          (J)       Ephraim indeed was like a silly dove which had no
            understanding ; he called upon Egypt : and they went to the
      12 Assyrians.              Let them go where they will, I will spread my net
           for them, and bring them down like the birds of the air, and
      13 instruct them with the report of one another's affliction.                                             Alas
            for them, because they have departed from me.                                        They are faint
           hearted, because they have transgressed against me.                                           Though I
      14 redeemed them, yet they spoke lies against me.                                             Their hearts
            do not cry to me ; but only make moans on their beds—for
      15 corn and wine they were deeply affected.                                         By me they were
            instructed—I indeed strengthened their arms ; but they devis-
      16 ed evils against me.                       They were turned back to no purpose.
            They were like a bended bow.                               Let their chiefs fall by the
            sword for the folly of their tongue ; let the derision they en-
      VIII.            dured in the land of Egypt come into their bosoms like
            dirt, like an eagle darting upon the house of the Lord.                                         Because
            they have transgressed my covenant, and have sinned against
        2 my law, will they cry to me, "                               God, we have known thee ? "
        3 Because Israel turned away good things they met with an ene-
        4 my.          They made kings for themselves but not by me—they
            set up a government and did not consult me ; of their silver
            and gold they made idols for themselves that they might be
        5 utterly cut off.                Away with thy calf,                      Samaria ! my wrath is
                                                                                                                      ;
              Ch. IX.                                      HOSEA.
               6 kindled against them.                  How long shall things which cannot be
                   made clean be in Israel ?                  A carpenter made it ; it is no God.
               7 Because thy calf,                  Samaria, was an imposture—because they
                   sowed blasted seed, therefore the catastrophe was correspon-
                   dent ; there is not a handful capable of yielding meal.                               And had
               8 it succeeded, strangers would have devoured it.                                 Israel is swal-
                   lowed up—he is now among the nations like an useless vessel,
               9 because he went up to the Assyrians.                               While Ephraim conti-
                   nued at home he sprouted again.                          They loved gifts, therefore
              10 they shall be delivered up to the nations.                                  I will now take
                   charge of them, and they shall cease a little while from anoint-
              11 ing a king and chiefs.                  Because Ephraim multiplied altars for
              12 sins—altars were to him objects of love ; I will prescribe for
                   him a multitude.              Though his rites were devised for other pur-
                   poses, the altars were objects of love.                         For what purpose soe-
              13 ver they offer sacrifices and eat flesh, the Lord will not accept
                   them ; he will now remember their iniquities and punish their
                   sins.      They turned back to Egypt, therefore among the As-
              14 Syrians they shall eat unclean things.                          Israel indeed forgot his
                   Maker and built fanes, and Juda multiplied fenced cities ; but
                   into these cities of his I will send a fire, and it shall devour
                   those buildings of theirs.
              IX.         Kejoice not, Israel ; nor be elated like the tribes, because
                   thou hast gone a whoring from thy God.                                    Thou didst love
                2 gifts on every corn floor; floor and press have disowned them,
                3 and the wine hath disappointed them.                             They did not dwell in
                   the land of the Lord : Ephraim became an inhabitant of Egypt
                   therefore among the Assyrians they shall eat unclean things.
                4 They did not pour out wine to the Lord nor offer him sweet
                   incense ;       their sacrifices shall be to them like the bread of af-
                   fliction ; all that eat thereof shall be polluted.                         Seeing their fu-
                5 neral loaves cannot come into the house of the Lord, what will
                   you do on the day of a solemn assembly ; and on a day of a
                (3 festival of the Lord ?                For this cause behold they are going
                   from the misery of Egypt, and Memphis shall receive them
                   and Machmas shall bury them.                           As for their silver, destruc-
                7 tion shall inherit it.             Thorns shall be in their habitations.                       The
                   days of the visitation are come ; at hand are the days of thy re-
                   compence : and Israel shall be afflicted like the prophet who
                                                                                                   —          ;
     Ch. X.                                       HOSEA.
          was struck with horror—the man who had been inspired.                                           By
          the multitude of thine iniquities thy madness was increased.
      8        (p)     Ephraim was a watchman with God, a prophet was a
          cunning snare in all his ways, they had fixed a madness by a
      9 house of God ; they were corrupt as in the days of Gibeah.                                        He
          will remember their iniquity ; he will punish their sins.
     10         (J)     I found Israel as a bunch of grapes in a wilderness
          and I saw their fathers like an early watcher in a fig orchard.
          They went to Belphagor and abandoned themselves to shame,
     11 and became abominable, compared with the beloved.                                        Ephraim
          is flown like a bird ;              their glories from parentage, births and
     12 conceptions are gone.                  For though they bring up their children,
          they shall be bereaved of them from among men : for (and alas
     13 for them ! my flesh is of them) Ephraim, as I have seen, have
          roused their children for a hunt—even Ephraim hath, that he
          may lead out his children to a fatal conflict.                           Give them
     14         (p)     (0 Lord what wilt thou give them ?)
            (J)     —Awombincapable of bearing children and dry breasts.
     15 All their wickedness was occasioned by Galgal ; because I hat-
          ed them there on account of the wickedness of their devices,
          I will drive them out of my house ; I will no longer continue
     16 to love them.             All their chiefs are become rebellious.                        Ephraim
          is in distress.         His roots are withered.                 He shall no more pro-
          duce fruit.         For though they bring forth, I will slay the belov-
     17 ed fruit of the womb.                     God will cast them off because they
          hearkened not to him ; and they shall be wanderers among the
          nations.
     X.         Israel was a vine with beautiful branches : the fruit there-
          of was abundant.              In proportion to the abundance of his fruit
          he multiplied altars : in proportion to the good things of his
       2 land he erected pillars.                  They divided their hearts ; they shall
          now be destroyed.               He will demolish their altars.                   Their pillars
       3 shall be in extreme distress.                     Because they will now say, " We
          have no king, because we feared not the Lord."                               But as for this
       4 king, what can he do for us ?                       Speaking words, false pretences,
          will he make a covenant?                       Will judgment spring up like a
       5 weed in an uncultivated field ?                      Let the inhabitants of Samaria
          sojourn with the calf of the house of On, because its people
          mourned for it.              Now as they provoked it they should rejoice
                                                                   !
                        XI.                                             HOSEA.
                Ch.
                  6 at its glory—that it hath been removed from them.                                                        They in-
                      deed having bound it, carried it to the Assyrians, as a present
                      to the king Iarim.                     As an homage gift of Ephraim he will re-
                      ceive it, and Israel shall be exposed to shame by his counsel.
                  7 Samaria hath cast away her king as a chip on the surface of wa-
                  8 ter. The altars of On, the stumbling blocks of Israel shall in-
                      deed be taken away ; thorns and thistles shall grow on their al-
                       tars,     and they will say to the hills, cover us, and to the
                  9 mounts, Fall upon us.                           From the time of those mounts, Israel
                      sinned : it was there they stood.                             Should not battle against these
                      children of iniquity overtake them on this mount, to chastise
                10 them?              Peoples shall indeed be gathered against them, when
                11 they are corrected for their two iniquities.                                           Ephraim is a heifer
                      taught to love victory ; but I will come against her beautiful
                      neck ; I will bring Ephraim into subjection ; I will cause Juda
                      to keep silence ; Jacob shall wrestle for himself.
                12           (p)       Sow for yourselves for righteousness ;                                      gather in the
                      fruit of life.             Light up for yourselves the light of knowledge.
                      Seek the Lord until the fruits of righteousness come for you.
                13 Why have you concealed impiety and gathered in the iniqui-
                      ties thereof?               You have eaten false fruit.
                         (J)      Because thou hast trusted in thy sins, and in the multi-
                14 tude of thine army, therefore destruction shall be raised up
                      among thy people ; and all thy fortifications shall be swept away,
                      as chief Salamin was out of the house of Jeroboam.                                                         In the
                      days of battle a mother was dashed to pieces upon her chil-
                15 dren.            In this manner I will deal with you,                                         house of Israel,
                       because of the perverseness of your iniquities.
                             (p) Early in the morning they have been rejected ! the
                      king of Israel is cast off
                XI.            (J) When Israel was young I loved him, and I called his
                  2 children out of Egypt.                               The more I called them, the more
                       they ran from my presence.                                They sacrificed to the Baalims,
                   3 and burned incense to graven images ; therefore I bound
                       Ephraim's feet.                  I took him up in my arms.                                When they did
                       not know that I heal by the destruction of men, I bound them
                  4 with the cords of my love.                                Now I will be to them as a man
                       who slappeth his cheeks, and I will keep an eye upon him,
                   5 and exercise authority over him.                                       Ephraim dwelt in Egypt,
                                                          —
    Ch. XII.                  HOSEA.
       though Assur was his king.  Because he refused to return, he
     6 was weakened in his cities by the sword. And it caused him
       to rest with his hands; and they shall eat the fruit of their
       devices.
     7    (p)  His people are indeed in imminent danger of being
       removed from their dwelling, will God be provoked against
       his honours so as never to exalt him ?
     8    (J) What shall I do with thee, Ephraim ?  Shall I shield
       thee, Israel ?What must I do with thee ?  Shall I make thee
       as Adama and as Seboim ?  My heart relenteth for him.  My
     9 compassion is moved.  I will not act according to the fierce-
       ness of mine indignation, I will not give up Ephraim to utter
       destruction.For I am God and am not man—The Holy One
       in the midst of thee.
   10     (p)  Am I then not to enter a city ?  Am I to follow the
       Lord?  Will he roar like a lion ?And because of his roaring,
       will the children of waters be affrighted ?
   11     (J)  They shall be frighted like a bird out of Egypt, and
      like a dove out of the land of the Assyrians.And I will bring
      them back to their own homes, saith the Lord.
   12     Ephraim encompassed me with a lie, and the house of
       Israel and Juda, with impieties.Now God had acknowledged
      them, and they were to be called the holy people of God.
   XII.     But this Ephraim is an evil spirit, he pursued a blast-
      ing wind the whole day.  He multiplied emptiness and vanity.
       Though he made a covenant with the Assyrians, yet oil went
    2 continually to Egypt.  With Juda also the Lord hath contro-
      versy.  To vindicate Jacob, he will retribute to him, accord-
    3 ing to his ways, and according to his devices. In the womb
      Jacob kicked his brother, but in his troubles he wrestled
    4 with God.   He indeed wrestled with an angel and prevailed.
      Have they wept or have they supplicated me ?Have they found
      me in the house of On f  Or have they been spoken to there ?
    5 The Lord God Almighty was to be his memorial : To thy
    6 God therefore thou art to return. Keep mercy and judgment
      and draw near to thy God continually.
    7     As for Chanaan, in his hand is a deceitful balance.He lov-
    8 ed to tyrannise. Ephraim indeed said, " But I am rich, I have
      found a rest for myself." Because of the iniquities which he
              XIII.                  HOSEA.
          Ch.
             hath committed, none of his labours shall turn to account.  I
           9 the Lord am thy God.     I brought thee up out of the land of
             Egypt, I will yet cause thee to dwell in tents, as in the days
          10 of a festival.Shall I speak to prophets ? Though I have mul-
             tiplied visions, and by the ministry of prophets made com-
          11 parisons, was it only because of Galaad ?   There were liars
             indeed at Galaad—chiefs sacrificing ; but their altars were like
             heaps in an uncultivated field.
          12     (p)  Though Jacob fled to the plain of Syria, and Israel
             made himself a slave for a wife, and for a wife kept watch, yet
             by a prophet the Lord brought Israel out of the land of Egypt
             and by a prophet he was preserved.
          13     (J)  Ephraim hath kindled indignation and provoked to
             wrath; his blood therefore shall be poured out on him, and
          XIII.     the Lord will retribute to him his reproach.   Accord-
             ing to Ephraim's own account he received rules of rectitude
             by Israel, but he attributed them to Baal and incurred death.
           2 And now they have proceeded on to greater acts of sin; and
             of their silver have made themselves a molten image, accord-
             ing to the image of idols. The handiworks of craftsmen being
             consecrated for them, They say, Sacrifice men, for young
           3 bulls have failed.  For this cause they shall be like a morn-
             ing cloud, and like a transient dew of the morning—like chaff
             blown from a winnowing floor and like a vapour from tears.
           4 As for me, I the Lord thy God am he who established the
             heaven, and created the earth, whose hands have created all
             the host of heaven ; but I did not display these to thee that
             thou shouldst go after them: as I have brought thee up
             out of the land of Egypt; therefore thou shalt acknow-
             ledge no God besides me.      Indeed besides me there is no
           5 Saviour.   It was I who fed thee in the desert—in an unin-
           6 habited land.  When in their pastures they were fed to the
             full ; then were their hearts lifted up.For this cause they for-
           7 got me.   Therefore I will be to them as a tiger, even as a tigress
           8 in the way to the Assyrians.  I will meet them as a bear be-
             reaved of her cubs, and rend the covering of their heart ; and
             the young lions of the forest shall there devour them ; and the
           9 beasts of the field shall tear them to pieces.In thy destruction,
          10    Israel, who can give succour ?Where is this king of thine ?
            —
    Ch. XIV.                     HOSEA.
        Let him save thee in all thy cities.  Let him judge thee, of
    11 whom thou saidst, "Give me a king and a chief."    I gave thee
        a king in mine indignation, and in my wrath restrained the
    12 whirlwind of Ephraim's iniquity.   As his sin is carefully laid
    13 up in store, pangs as of a woman in travail shall come upon
        him.
           (p) With regard to that son of thine who is prudent, why
       may not he survive in the destruction of children.
    14     (J) Him I will deliver from the power of the grave, and
       from death I will redeem them.
           (p)    death, where is thy punishment ?   Where thy sting,
          grave ?  Is comfort hid from mine eyes ? Since he will make
    15 a distinction among brethren ; let the Lord bring upon him a
        blasting wind from the desert, and let it dry up his veins and
       lay waste his fountains ; let it parch up his land and all his pre-
        cious stores.
    16     (J) Samaria shall be utterly destroyed : because she re-
       belled against her God, they shall fall by the sword ; and their
       infants shall be dashed to pieces, and their women with child
        shall be ripped up.
    XIV.      (p)   Israel, return to the Lord thy God.   Seeing they
     2 have been weakened for thine iniquities, take words with you
       and return to the Lord your God, and, that you may not re-
       ceive the punishment of iniquity but may receive good things,
     o say to him, " We will render to thee the fruit of our lips.As-
       sur cannot save us.   We will no more mount horses; we will
       no more say to the works of our hand, "You are our gods."
       He who is in thee will compassionate the fatherless.
     4     (J) I will heal their habitations. I will undoubtedly love
       them.   Because he hath turned away my wrath from him, I
     5 will be to Israel like dew.He shall bloom like a lily, and shoot
     6 out his roots like Lebanon.  His branches shall spread ; and he
       shall be like a fruitful olive tree, and like that of Lebanon
     7 shall be his fragrance.  They shall return and dwell under his
        shade ; they shall live and be plentifully fed with corn.And
       he shall flourish like a vine and the memorial of him shall be
     8 like the wine of Lebanon.   As for Ephraim, what hath he any
       more to do with idols ?  I humbled him and I will strengthen
           VOL. II.                   4 o
                     XIV                                   HOSEA.
              Ch.
                   him.       I am like a fruitful juniper ; from me thou shalt find
                   fruit.
                9        (p) Who is wise that he may understand these things,
                   prudent, that he may know them ?                             Because the ways of the
                   Lord are straight ; therefore the righteous will walk in them :
                   But in them the wicked shall be without strength.
                                                             JOEL.
              I.       A word of the Lord which came to Joel son of Bathuel.
                2        HEAR these things ye elders !                        And give ear all ye inha-
                   bitants of the land !              Have such things happened in your days,
                3 or in the days of your fathers ?                         Of these things give an ac-
                   account to your children ; and let your children tell their chil-
                   dren ; and their children, another generation.
                4        The leavings of the palmer worm have been devoured by
                   the grasshopper, and the leavings of the grasshopper have
                   been devoured by the locust.                       And the mildew hath consum-
                   ed what the locust left.
                5        Awake ye drunkard, from your wine and weep.                                        Sing a
                   mournful song all ye who drink wine to drunkenness; for joy
                6 and gladness are gone from your mouth.                                For against my land
                   a nation is come up, strong and innumerable.                                Their teeth are
                   the teeth of lions; and their grinders, those of a young lion.
                7 They have made my vineyard a desolation ; and my fig orch-
                   ards, a waste.          They have searched it thoroughly and it is gone
                   to wreck ; they have made the branches thereof white.
                8        Let thy song of woe before me be more plaintive than that
                   of a bride clothed with sackcloth for the husband of her youth.
                9 Sacrifice and libation are taken away from the house of the Lord.
                   Mourn ye priests, who minister at the Lord's altar, because
              10 the fields are wasted.                 Let the land mourn : because the corn
                   hath suffered grievously : wine is dried away ; oil is diminish-
              11 ed ; husbandmen are parched up.                              Mourn, ye farms, for the
                   wheat and barley, because the harvester is perished from the
              12 field.       The vines are withered and the fig trees are diminish-
                   ed      peach and palm and citron trees and all the trees of the
                        ;
              13 field are withered.                Because the children of men are ashamed
                                                                                                                ;
                                                      JOEL.
      Ch. II.
            of joy, gird yourselves, ye priests, and lament bitterly : sing
            the song of woe, ye who minister at the altar ; go in and sleep
       14 in sackcloth, ye ministers of God.                          Because sacrifice and liba-
            tion are withheld from the house of your God.                              Set apart a fast
            proclaim a solemn service; assemble the elders—all the inha-
            bitants of the land, to the house of your God, and cry to the
            Lord incessantly, "Ah me!                       Ah me! Ah me! for the day."
       15 For the day of the Lord is at hand ; and it will come like de-
      16 struction on destruction.                   Food is utterly destroyed before your
      17 eyes         joy and gladness, from the house of your God.                                        The
                  —
            heifers startled at their stalls.                 Stores are exhausted ; wine lakes
       18 are gone to ruin,                 xls the corn is blasted, what shall we sub-
            stitute for ourselves?                 The herds of cattle uttered mournful
            lowings, because there was no pasture for them ; and the flocks
       19 of sheep are utterly destroyed.                          To thee,           Lord, let me cry
            for myself, because a fire hath consumed the pleasant places
            of the wilderness, and a flame hath blasted all the trees of the
       20 field.       To thee indeed the cattle in the plain have looked up,
            because the springs of water are quite dry, and a fire hath de-
            voured the pleasant places of the wilderness.
       II.        Blow the trumpet in Sion ; make proclamation on my holy
            mountain.          And let all the inhabitants of the land be alarmed.
        2 For the day of the Lord is approaching—for it is near—a day
            of darkness and gloom—a day of clouds and thick darkness.
            Like dawn, there shall be poured out on the mountains a peo-
            ple numerous and powerful, the like of them hath never been,
         3 nor shall be any more to the years of all generations.                                      Before
            them is a kindling fire, and all behind them a glowing flame.
            Before them the land is like a pleasure garden, and behind
            them, a scene of desolation : and there is none who can escape
         4 them.        Their appearance is like the appearance of horses ; and
         5 like horsemen they can pursue.                            With a noise like that of
            chariots they will bound over the tops of mountains and their
            noise is like that of a flaming fire consuming stubble.                                      They
            are like a people numerous and powerful, arrayed for battle-
         6 At their presence peoples will be appalled and every face
         7 covered with blackness.                    They can run like warriors and like
            mighty warriors scale walls ; and every one will march in his
         8 own path. They will not alter their lines of march ; nor will any
                                                                     —
       Ch. II.                      JOEL.
          one separate from his comrade.   They will march loaded with
          their arms, and though they fall on their weapons they shall
        9 not be killed.  They will surprise the city and run upon the
          walls ; they will climb up the houses and enter at windows like
       10 thieves. At their presence the earth will be confounded and
          the heaven shaken, and the sun and the moon will be darken-
          ed, and the stars will withdraw their refulgence, and the Lord
       11 will utter his voice before his army.Because the circuit of his
          camp is very large—because the operation of his words is ir-
          resistable—because the day of the Lord is great, extremely
       12 awful; who therefore shall be able to abide it? Now therefore
          saith the Lord your God, turn to me with your whole heart,
          and with fasting    and with weeping and with mourning.
       13 Kend your hearts and not your garments, and turn to the Lord
          your God ; for he is gracious and merciful, long suffering and
       14 full of compassion, and relenteth at evils. Who knoweth but
          he will turn and relent, and leave behind him a blessing and a
          sacrifice and a libation for the Lord your God.
       15     Sound the trumpet in Sion.    Appoint a fast; proclaim a
       16 solemn act of worship.    Assemble the people; sanctify the
          congregation ; choose elders.  Bring together infants at the
          breast.  Let the bridegroom come forth from his chamber and
       17 the bride from her wardrobe.  At the foot of the altar, let the
          priests who minister to the Lord, weep, and say, Spare,
          Lord, thy people ; and give not up thy heritage to reproach
          for the nations to rule over them.
       18     That they may not say among the nations, "Where is their
       19 God?" the Lord was indeed jealous for his land and spared
          his people. And the Lord answered and said to his people, Be-
          hold I will send you corn and wine and oil, and with them you
          shall be plentifully supplied.And I will no more make you a
       20 reproach among the nations.   This army from the north I will
          remove from you, and drive it to a land without water, and
          destroy its front in the first and its rear in the last sea: and
       21 its smell shall come up and its stench shall ascend, because it
          hath magnified its works.
              (p) Take courage,     land, rejoice and be glad; for it is
       22 the Lord who made it great to perform exploits.    Take cour-
          age,    beasts of the field ; for the plains of the wilderness are
    Ch. III.                      JOEL.
       in bloom.   Because the trees have yielded their fruit—the fig
    23 tree and the vine have put forth their strength ; rejoice there-
       fore, ye children of Sion and exult in the Lord your God : for
        he hath given you this food for righteousness, and he will dis-
    24 til upon you the former and the latter rain as heretofore.And
       your threshing floors shall be filled with corn, and your vats
       shall overflow with wine and oil.
    25     (J) I will indeed make you compensation for what hath
       been devoured by the grasshopper and the locust, the palmer
       worm and the mildew—that great army of mine which I sent
    26 against you.  And you shall eat plentifully and be satisfied, and
       shall praise the name of the Lord your God, who hath dealt
       wonderfully with you ; and my people shall never be put to
    27 shame.   And you shall know that I am in the midst of Israel,
       and that I the Lord am your God and besides me there is no
    28 other ; and my people shall never be put to shame. And it shall
       come to pass after these things that I will pour out a portion
       of my spirit on all flesh, and your sons and your daughters
       shall prophesy ; and your old men shall dream dreams ; and
    29 your young men shall see visions.  And on my servants and on
       my hand maids in those days I will pour out a portion of my
    30 spirit. And I will exhibit wonders in heaven and on the earth,
    31 blood and fire and smoky vapour.      The sun shall be turned
       into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the coming of
    32 the great and illustrious day of the Lord.   But whoever will
       call on the name of the Lord shall be saved ; for on mount Si-
       on and in Jerusalem shall be the Saviour, as the Lord hath
       said, and the publishers of glad tidings, whom the Lord hath
       called.
    III.    Because, lo ! Here I am in those days and at that time when
     2 I have brought back the captivity of Juda and Jerusalem ; and
       I will gather all the nations and bring them down to the valley
       of Josaphat and plead with them there for my people and my
       heritage, Israel, who have been scattered among the nations.
     3     They indeed divided my land among themselves and cast
       lots for my people ; they gave my boys to harlots and sold my
     4 girls for wine and drank it. Now what have you, Tyre and Si-
       don and all Galilee of foreign tribes, to do with me ?Are you
       rendering me a retribution ?   Or are you venting your spite
        Ch. III.                   JOEL.
            against me ?On your heads I will severely and speedily return
         5 your retribution.Because you have taken my silver and my
         6 gold, and carried my choicest goods into your temples, and
           sold the sons of Juda and the sons of Jerusalem to the Greeks,
         7 that you might remove them far from their borders ; therefore
           behold I will raise them up from the places whither you sold
         8 them, and return your retribution on your heads.And I will
            deliver your sons and your daughters into the hands of the
           sons of Juda, that they may sell them as captives to a far dis-
           tant nation.
          9    Because the Lord hath spoken, proclaim these things
           among the nations.  Declare war : rouse the warriors : assem-
         10 ble and march up, all ye men of war.Beat your ploughshares
           into swords and your pruning hooks into spears.Let the weak
         11 say, I am strong.Assemble and come all ye nations around
            and be there gathered together.Let the man of peace become
         12 a soldier.Let all the nations be roused and come up to the
            valley of Josaphat ; for there I will sit to judge all the nations
         13 around. Put to the sickles, for the harvest is come ; go in and
            tread for the vat is full.Cause the wine lakes to overflow ; for
         14 their wicked deeds have been multiplied. Screams resound in the
            valley of Judgment !Because the day of the Lord in the val-
         15 ley of Judgment is at hand.The sun and the moon shall be
            obscured in darkness ; and the stars shall withdraw their reful-
         16 gence ; and the Lord will utter a shout from Sion, and from
            Jerusalem he will send forth his voice; and the heaven and
            the earth shall be shaken: but the Lord will spare his
         17 people and strengthen the sons of Israel.And ye shall know
            that I am the Lord your God, who dwell in Sion my holy
            mountain, and Jerusalem shall be holy and strangers shall no
         18 more pass through it.And it shall come to pass in that day,
            that the mountains shall distil new wine ; and the hills shall
            send forth streams of milk ; and all the fountains of Juda shall
            pour out water ; and a fountain shall issue from the house
         19 of the Lord, which shall water the valley of bulrushes.Egypt
            shall be a desolation, and Idumea a scene of destruction, for
            the injuries done to the children of Juda—for their having shed
         20 innocent blood in their land : but Judea shall be inhabited for
         21 ever, and Jerusalem for generations of generations : and I will
                                     JOEL.
    Ch. III.
       make inquisition for their blood, and will not pass it over un-
       revenged : and the Lord will dwell in Sion.
                                    AMOS.
    I.  TJie words of Amos which came to         him at Akkarim of The-
           koue, which came to him in vision concerning Jerusalem in
           the days of Ozias king of Juda, and in the days of Jero-
           boam son of Joas, king of Israel, two years before the earth-
           quake.   And he said,
     2     From Sion the Lord hath spoken with majesty, and from
        Jerusalem he uttered his voice, and the pastures of the shep-
     3 herds mourned, and the top of Carmel withered.              And the
        Lord said,
           For the three transgressions of Damascus, and for four
        shall I not be averse from it ?
            Because with iron saws they sawed asunder the pregnant
     4 wives of the men of Galaad ; therefore I will send a fire into
        the house of Azael, and it shall devour the foundations of Ben-
     5 Ader.    And I will break the bars of Damascus, and utterly
        destroy the inhabitants out of the plain of On, and I will cut
        off a tribe from the men of Charran, and the chosen people
        of Syria shall be made captives, saith the Lord.
     6      Thus saith the Lord, For the three transgressions of Ga-
        za, and for four, shall I not be averse from them?           Because
        they captivated the captives of the Salamonites, to deliver them
      7 up to Idumea ; therefore I will send a fire against the walls
      8 of Gaza, and it shall devour the foundations thereof.         And I
        will utterly destroy inhabitants out of Azotus, and a tribe shall
        be taken away from Ascalon ; and I will lay my hand on Ak-
        karon, and the remnant of the Philistines shall be destroyed
        saith the Lord.
      9     Thus saith the Lord, For the three transgressions of
        Tyre, and for four shall I not be averse from it ?           Because
        they delivered up the captives of the Salamonites to Idumea,
     10 and did not remember the covenant of brothers ; therefore
        I will send a fire against the walls of Tyre, and it shall devour
        the foundation thereof.
                                                                                                                                              :
                  Cli. II.                                                AMOS.
                 11           Thus saith the Lord, For the three transgressions of
                        Idumea, and for four shall I not be averse from it?                                                      Because
                        they pursued their brother with a sword, and violated a mo-
                        ther on the ground : he indeed to evidence his intention seiz-
                        ed by force ; he kept up his horror and his onset till he accom-
                 12 plished his purpose ; therefore I will send a fire against Thai-
                        man, and it shall consume the foundation of its walls.
                  13          Thus saith the Lord, For the three transgressions of the
                        Ammonites, and for four shall I not be averse from them?
                        Because they ripped up the pregnant wives of the Galaadites,
                 14 that they might enlarge their own borders ; therefore against the
                        walls of Kabbath I will kindle a fire, which shall consume its
                        foundations, with a shout in the day of battle ; and it shall
                 15 be shaken in the day of its destruction; and its kings shall
                        go into captivity, and their priests, and their chiefs together,
                        saith the Lord.
                 II.           Thus saith the Lord, For the three transgressions of
                        Moab, and for four shall I not be averse from him ?                                                              Be-
                   2 cause he burned into lime the bones of the king of Idumea;
                        therefore I will send a fire into Moab, and it shall devour the
                       foundations of her cities, and Moab shall die of weakness
                   3 with shouting and with the clangour of trumpets, I will cut
                        off her judge, and slay all her chiefs with him, saith the Lord.
                   4          Thus saith the Lord, For the three transgressions of
                       the children of Juda, and for four, shall I not be averse from
                        him ?         Because they have rejected the law of the Lord, and
                        have not kept his commandments, and have been led astray
                        by their vanities which they made, which their fathers had fol-
                   5 lowed ; therefore I will send a fire against Juda, and it shall de-
                        vour the foundations of Jerusalem.
                   6          Thus saith the Lord, For the three transgressions of Israel,
                       and for four, shall I not be averse from him ?                                                 Because they
                        sold a righteous one for silver and a needy one for a pair of
                   7 sandals ; and dashed their sandals against the heads of the poor ;
                        and turned aside the way of the meek ; and a son and a father
                   8 went in unto the same handmaid.                                     That they might profane the
                        name of their God, having bound their garments with cords of
                        rushes, they pitched their tents near the altar, and drank, in
                    9 the house of their God, wine got by extortion.                                                   As for me, I
                                                     !                                                                     ;
        Ch. III.                                             AMOS.
              removed from before them the Amorite whose stature was like
              that of a cedar.                Though he was strong as an oak, I withered
        10 his fruit above and his roots underneath.                                         I indeed brought
              you up out of the land of Egypt, and led you about in the wil-
              derness forty years, that you might inherit the land of the
        11 Amorites.              And I took some of your sons for prophets, and
              some of your young men for a state of sanctification.                                                  Are
              not these things so,                       children of Israel?                    Saith the Lord.
        12 But you caused my sanctified ones to drink wine ; and charged
        13 the prophets, saying, " You shall not prophesy : " Therefore be-
              hold I will roll under you, as a cart rolleth which is loaded
        14 with sheaves, so that flight shall perish from the swift runner
              and the strong will not be master of his strength ; and the war-
         15 rior shall not save his life.                         And the bowman shall not stand,
              nor shall the swift of foot escape; even the horseman shall
         16 not save his life.                  The mighty will not know how to act with
               their forces :          the naked shall, in that day, pursue, saith the
               Lord.
         III.          (p)      Hear this word which the Lord hath spoken against
               you, O house of Israel
                     (J)      Yes, against every tribe which I brought out of the
               land of Egypt, saying, Of all the tribes of the earth, I acknow-
               ledge none but you.                     Therefore I will punish you for all your
               sins.
                     (p)      Will two walk together continually unless they agree ?
           4 Will a lion roar from his forest when he hath no prey ?                                             Will a
               young lion utter a continued roar from his den unless he be
           5 tearing something ?                      Will a bird fall on the ground unless he
               be shot ?          Will a gin on the ground be loosened, unless some-
           6 thing be caught ?                   Shall a trumpet sound in a city and the peo-
               ple not be alarmed ?                  Can there be in a city a calamity which the
           7 Lord hath not inflicted ?                       Seeingthe Lord will not do any thing
           8 without giving warning to his servants ; shall a lion roar and
               none be struck with dread ?                          Hath the Lord spoken and will
            9 none prophesy ?                 Make proclamation in the provinces of Assy-
               ria, and in the regions of Egypt, and say, Assemble yourselves
               on the mountains of Samaria, and see many wonderful things
                in the midst thereof, and the cruel oppression which is in it.
          10 Nowdid shenotknowthingswhich will be before her? Saith the
                     VOL. II.                                   4 P
                                                                                                            ; ;
                  IV.                                  AMOS.
            Ch.
                 Lord.      They are treasuring up injustice and misery in their
            11 countries.         Therefore, thus saith the Lord God, "Tyre is all
                 around.       Thy land shall be wasted."                He will break thy power
            12 and thy regions shall be ravaged.                       Thus saith the Lord, "As
                 when a shepherd snatcheth from the mouth of a lion two legs
                 or a piece of an ear ; so shall the children of Israel be snatched,
                 who dwell in Samaria over against that tribe and in Damas-
                 cus."
            13        Hear ye priests, and testify to the house of Israel, saith the
            14 Lord Almighty, That on the clay when I punish Israel for his
                 impieties, I will execute vengeance also on the altars of Bethel
                 and the horns of the altar shall be cut off and fall to the ground.
            15 I will confound and smite the turretted house over the sum-
                 mer house ; and the houses of ivory shall perish ; and many
                 other houses shall perish with them, saith the Lord.
            IV.         Hear this word, ye heifers of Basanitis, ye who are on the
                 mountain of Samaria ; who tyrannise over the distressed and
                 trample the needy, who say to your masters, Bring and let us
              2 drink.       The Lord sweareth by his Holies, and lo ! days are com-
                 ing upon you when fiery pestilent men will seize you with
              3 arms ; and throw them with you into boiling kettles : and
                  you shall be dragged out naked over against one another, and
              4 cast out naked on the mountain Koniman, saith the Lord.                                 You
                  have gone to Baithel and committed transgression, to Galgala
                  and multiplied transgressions, and have offered your sacrifices
               5 every morning, and your tythes every three days ; for having
                  publicly read a law they proclaimed thanksgivings.                             Proclaim
                  them, because in such things the children of Israel delight,
               6 saith the Lord.            But as for me, I will give you gnashing of
                  teeth in all your cities, and want of bread in all your places.
               7       When you returned not to me, saith the Lord, I withheld
                  from you the rain three months before harvest ; with an intent
                  to rain on one city and on another city not to rain.                           One part
                  was to be watered, and the part on which I did not rain, to be
               8 dried up ; so that two or three cities should crowd to one city
                  for drink and not be satisfied.
               9        And when you turned not to me, saith the Lord, I smole
                   you with blasting and mildew : you multiplied your gardens
                                                                                                                                     :
       Ch. V.                                                  AMOS.
             the caterpillar devoured your vineyards and your fig trees and
             your olive orchards.
       10           When even for this you turned not to me, saith the Lord,
             I sent death among you by the way of Egypt, and slew your
             young men with the sword and gave up your horses to capture
       11 and by your rage I involved your camps in fire.                                                         And when
             even for this you turned not to me, saith the Lord, I overthrew
              you as God overthrew Sodom and Gomorra ; and you became
              like a brand plucked out of fire.
       12           Now as even for this you have not turned to me, saith the
              Lord, therefore in this manner will I deal with thee, Israel.
              But because I will deal thus with thee, prepare,                                                Israel, to in-
       13 voke thy God : for behold here am I, who give strength to
              thunder—Who create wind, and proclaim for men his anoint-
              ed one—who make the morning dawn and thick darkness, and
              who walk on the high places of the earth, whose name is the
              Lord God, Omnipotent.
       A'.          (p)       Hear this word of the Lord—a song of woe which I
          2 take up respecting you.                           The house of Israel is fallefi.                           Shall it
              never more rise again ?                        The virgin of Israel is prostrate on the
              ground. Is there none to raise her up ? For this cause thus saith
          3 the Lord, Lord, of the city from which a thousand marched,
              there shall be left a hundred ; and of the city, from which a
              hundred marched, ten shall be left to the house of Israel.
          4 Wherefore, thus saith the Lord to the house of Israel, Seek
              me and you shall live.                        But seek not Baithel, nor go to Galgal,
          5 nor pass on to the Well of Oath : because Galgal shall surely
              go into captivity, and Baithel shall be as if it had never existed.
              Seek the Lord and live, that the house of Joseph may not blaze
              like a fire, and devour him : and the house of Israel have none
          7 to quench it.                  Heis the exalter of judgment and hath establish-
          8 ed righteousness for the earth.                                     He is the maker and form-
              er of all things.                    He turned darkness into day, and darkeneth
              the day into night.                     He calleth to him the water of the sea, and
          9 poureth it out on the face of the earth.                                         His name is the Lord.
               He setteth destruction against strength and bringeth misery
               on bulwarks.
        10           (J)       They hated a reprover in the gates and held in abhor-
        11 rence a holy word; therefore because they have beaten the
         Ch. VI.                       AMOS.
            poor with their fists, though you had received from them choice
            gifts ; you have built houses of hewn stone ; but in them you
            shall not dwell ; you have planted lovely vineyards, but you
            shall not drink the wine thereof.
         12     (p)  Because I know your manifold impieties and your
            sins are mighty—you trample down the righteous, take pledg-
         13 es and turn aside the poor in the gates ; therefore the prudent
            will at that time be silent because it is the time of wicked men.
         14 Seek good and not evil that you may live, and so the Lord
         15 God Almighty will be with you.     As you have said, We have
            hated evil and loved good ; therefore re-establish judgment in
            the gates, that the Lord God Almighty may have compassion
         16 on the remnant of Joseph.   Forthis purpose, saith the Lord, the
            God Almighty, in all the streets let there be wailing, and in
            all the highways let them say, Alas ! Alas ! Let the husbandman
            be called to lamentation and mourning, and to them who are
        17 skilled in the song of woe.    And in all the ways let there be
            wailing ; for I will pass through the midst of thee, said the
        18 Lord.   Alas for them who desire the day of the Lord !      Why
            should you desire the day of the Lord, when it is darkness and
        19 not light?    As if a man would flee from the face of a lion and
            a bear met him, or, as if one would leap into a house and lean-
        20 ing his hand on the wall a serpent bit him.   Is not this day of
            the Lord darkness and not light—even thick darkness, in
            which there is not a ray of light ?
        21     (J)   I have hated, I have rejected your festivals, and I will
        22 not smell your sacrifices at your solemn assemblies.   Therefore
            though you offer me whole burnt offerings, I will not accept
            your sacrifices nor regard   your sumptuous peace offerings.
        23 Take from me the noise of thy songs, and let me not hear the
        24 melody of musical instruments ; but let judgment roll down
        25 like water, and righteousness like an impassable torrent.    Did
            you,   house of Israel offer to me burnt offerings and sacrifi-
            ces, forty years in the wilderness ?You have indeed taken up
        26 the tent of Moloch and the star of your god Eaiphan—those
            types of them which you have made for yourselves.     Therefore
            I will remove you beyond Damascus ; saith the Lord, the God
            whose name is the Almighty.
        VI.     Alas for them who despise Sion and have put their trust
                                                           AMOS.
        Ch. VII.
              in the mount of Samaria.                          They have gathered as a vintage
          2 the governments of nations and gone in.                                             house of Israel,
              Go ye all over [to Chalane] and see, and thence pass on to
              Ematraba and thence go down to Gath of the Philistines, to
              the strongest of all those kingdoms of theirs.                                        Are their bor-
          3 ders larger than yours, who are coming to an evil day, who are
              drawing near and on the point of touching false sabbaths?
          I Some of you are sleeping on beds of ivory and lolling at ease
              on their couches, and eating kids from the flocks, and from
          5 the herds calves fed with milk :                                 some are dwellino: on the
              sound of musical instruments ; as if they thought it fixed and
          6 not fleeting.               Some are drinking filtered wine and anointing
              themselves with most precious ointment and have no feeling
          7 for the affliction of Joseph.                          Now for this cause, from being a
              a government of mighties they shall be captives, and the
          8 neighing of horses shall be taken away from Ephraim.                                                     For
              the Lord hath sworn by himself, As I abhor all this haughti-
              ness of Jacob and have hated all his regions, therefore I will
          9 destroy cities with their inhabitants.                                  And it shall come to
        10 pass that if ten head men be left in one family, they shall die
              and the residue shall be left and their domestics shall succeed
              them.        And when they are pressed to bring their bones out of
              the house, one will say to them who are over the family, Are
             there any more yet with thee ?                             And when one will say, There
        11 is no more : then will one say, Forbear to mention the name
              of the Lord on this account ; for behold the Lord command-
             eth, and he will smite the great house with breaches and the
        12 small house with fractures.                           Can horses pursue among rocks ?
              Will they refrain from whinnying at females ?                                          Because you
              have turned judgment into fury, and the fruit of righteousness
        13 into bitterness, some rejoicing in a thing of naught, and others
        14 saying, "                     T                    ownstrength taken horns "
                             Have wenot by our                                                           ?      There-
              fore, behold I will raise up against you,                                      house of Israel, a
             nation, saith the Lord of hosts, who shall afflict you that you
             may not enter the bay of Aimath, nor approach the brook at
             the settings of the sun.
        VII.           (p) So the Lord God pointed out to me, and lo ! an
             eastern swarm of locusts was coming and behold a brouchus
             locust, one Gog, was their king ; and when they had complete-
          1
            VII.                      AMOS.
        Ch.
           ly devoured the grass of the land, I said,        Lord, Lord, be
           appeased.   Who shall raise up Jacob?        Because he is very
         2 small, relent,   Lord at this.
         3     This therefore shall not be, saith the Lord.
         4     So the Lord pointed out to me, and lo ! the Lord had
           called for the punishment by fire and it was devouring the
         5 great abyss and consuming the portion of the Lord, where-
            upon I said, Cease,     Lord, I beseech thee.    Who shall raise
         6 up Jacob ?    Because he is very small, relent,     Lord, at this.
            This then shall not be, saith the Lord.
         7     So the Lord pointed out to me ; and lo ! he was standing on
            a wall of adamant and in his hand was an adamant.        And the
            Lord said to me, What dost thou see, Amos ?         And when I
         8 said, An Adamant ; the Lord said to me, Behold I interpose an
            adamant in the midst of my people Israel that I may no more
         9 permit them to transgress.      Ridiculous altars shall indeed be
            utterly destroyed and the sanctuaries of Israel shall be laid
            waste and I will rise up against the house of Jeroboam with
            a sword.
        10     Then Amasias the priest of Baithel sent to Jeroboam king
            of Israel, saying, Amos is raising insurrections against thee
            in the midst of the house of Israel.    The land cannot bear all
         1  his words.   For thus Amos saith, " Jeroboam shall die by the
            sword ; and Israel shall be carried away captive from his land."
         12 Moreover Amasias said to Amos, Begone, seer.         Get thee to
        13 the land of Juda and dwell there ; and prophesy there : but
            against Baithel thou shalt not continue to prophesy ; for it is
         14 the sanctuary of the king.    It is the king's house. Whereupon
            Amos answered and said to Amasias, I was not a prophet, nor
         15 a son of a prophet.     I was only a herdsman and a gatherer of
            dates ; and the Lord took me from the flocks and the Lord said
         16 to me, Go and prophesy against my people Israel.      Now there-
            fore hear a word of the Lord, Thou sayst, "Prophesy not
            against Israel," and " Thou shalt not give any disturbance to
         17 Israel."  Therefore thus saith the Lord.
                " Thy wife shall be a prostitute in the city ; and thy sons
             and thy daughters shall fall by the sword ; and thy land shall
            be measured out with a line ; and thou shalt die in a polluted
             land ; and Israel shall be carried captive from his land."
        VIII. IX.               AMOS.
    Ch.
    VIII.     So the Lord, Lord pointed out to me, and lo ! a fowler's
     2 basket.  And he said, Amos, what dost thou see ?  And when I
        said, A fowler's basket, the Lord said to me, The end is come
        upon my people Israel.  I will no more permit them to trans-
     3 gress.  In that day indeed the vaulted cielings of this temple
        shall resound with cries of woe, saith the Lord, Lord. Multi-
        tudes are fallen every where, I will bring on silence.
     4     (p) Hear this, I beseech you, ye who every morning op-
        press the needy, and by your tyranny drive the poor from the
     5 land, saying, When will the new moon be over that we may
        buy ?  And the sabbaths, that we may open store ? to make
        the measure small, and the weight heavy, and to make the
      6 balance uneven, that we may purchase the poor for silver,
        and the needy for a pair of sandals, when from every kind of
      7 product we shall have made gain.   The Lord sweareth, in op-
        position to this arrogance of Jacob, that uone of these works
      8 of yours shall ever be forgotten. Now for these things shall
        not the land be troubled and every inhabitant therein mourn ?
        Destruction indeed shall swell like a river, and flow down like
      9 the river of Egypt.  And it shall come to pass in that day,
        saith the Lord, Lord, That the sun shall set at noon day, and
     10 the light on that day shall be darkened on the earth.    And
        I will turn your festivals into mourning, and all your sono-s
        into songs of lamentation. AndI will bring sackcloth on everv
        loin and baldness on every head, and cause a mourning for
        him like that for a beloved, and for them with him, like that
        of a day of sorrow.
     11    Behold days are coming, saith the Lord, when I will send
        a famine against the land—not a famine of bread, nor a thirst
     12 for water ; but a famine of hearing the word of the Lord.And
        they shall fluctuate as water from sea to sea, and run to and
        fro ; from north to east seeking the word of the Lord, and shall
     13 not find it. In that day the fair virgins and young men shall
        faint for thirst.They who swear by the atonement of Samaria,
        and they who say, Thy God,     Dan, liveth : thy God,    Ber-
        sabee, liveth, shall indeed fall and shall never rise any more.
     IX.    I saw the Lord standing on the altar, and he said, Smite
        the propitiatory and let the porches be shaken, and cut them
        down on the heads of them all ; and those of them who are left
         Ch. IX.                      AMOS.
             I will slay with the sword.Such of them as flee shall not get
          2 away ; and such of them as escape shall not be saved. Though
             they hide themselves in the mansion of the dead, thence my
             hand will drag them up. And though they climb up to heaven,
          3 thence I will bring them down.  Though they hide themselves
             on the top of Carmel, I will there search them out and take
             them.  And should they go down from my sight into the depths
             of the sea, I will there give orders to the dragon and he will
          4 bite them.   And if they go into captivity before their enemies,
             I will there command the sword and it shall slay them.I will
             indeed keep mine eyes fixed on them for evils and not for
          5 good—even I who am the Lord, the Lord God Almighty who
             toucheth the earth and shaketh it, and all its inhabitants shall
             mourn, and its destruction shall swell like a river, and flow
          6 down like the river of Egypt; who buildeth his stairs up to
             heaven, and his tribunal on the foundations of the earth ; who
             calleth to him the water of the sea and poureth it out on the
          7 face of the earth, the Lord Almighty is his name.
              Are not you,    Israelites, the same to me as the Ethiopians,
             saith the Lord. Did I not bring Israel up out of the land of Egypt,
             and the Philistines out of Cappadocia and the Syrians from Both-
          8 ras ? Behold the eyes of the Lord God are against every kingdom
             of sinners, and I will cut it off from the face of the earth.But
             because I will not utterly destroy the house of Israel, saith the
          9 Lord, therefore I order, and I will scatter the house of Israel
             among all the nations, as if they were winnowed with a fan ;
         10 and not a morsel of it shall fall on this land.By the sword all
             the sinners of my people shall die, who say, These evils shall
             not come near nor fall upon us.
         11     In that day 1 will raise up the tabernacle of David which hath
             fallen ; I will rebuild those parts of it which have fallen to de-
             cay, and repair what have been demolished.  I will indeed re-
         12 build it as in the days of old, that the rest of mankind may
             seek [the Lord] even all the nations who are called by my
             name, saith the Lord who doth all these things.
         13     Behold the days are coming, saith the Lord, When the
             harvester shall overtake the grape gatherer ; and the grape shall
             begin to ripen at seeding time ; and the mountains shall distil
         14 sweet wine ; and all the hills shall be planted.And I will bring
                                                                                                               ;
            IX.                                      AMOS.
     Ch.
           back the captivity of my people Israel ; and they shall rebuild
           the wasted cities and inhabit them ; and they shall plant vine-
           yards and drink the wine thereof; and make gardens and eat
     15 the fruits of them.                I will indeed plant them in their own land ;
           and they shall no more be rooted up from the land, which I
           have given them, saith the Lord God Almighty.
                                                 OBADIAH.
                                         The vision of Obadiak.
                Thus saith the Lord God to Idumea, (I heard the report
           from the Lord.            When he sent a message to the nations.                             Arise
       2 and let us go up against it to battle.)                              Behold I have made
           thee very small among the nations : thou art dishonoured in
       3 a high degree.               The pride of thy heart puffed thee up, dwell-
           ing in the clefts of rocks.                   (Having made his habitation high
           he said in his heart, Who can bring me down to the ground ?)
       4 Though thou shouldst soar aloft like an eagle, and make thy
           nest among the stars ; thence I will pull thee down, saith the
       5 Lord.         If thieves come to thee, or robbers by night ; in what
           place soever thou mayst be cast ; would they not steal what
           would satisfy them ?                  And if grape gatherers came to thee,
        6 would they leave no gleaning ?                         How Esau hath been search-
       7 ed !      are even his hidden stores left ?                       They have driven thee
           to the borders.           All the men in league with thee, have risen up
           against thee.          Thy men of peace prevailed against thee.                              They
           laid snares under thee.                They have no understanding.
       8         In that day, saith the Lord, I will destroy wise men out of
        9 Idumea, and understanding out of the mount of Esau.                                      And thy
           warriors from Thaiman shall be dismayed, that man may be
      10 removed from the mountain of Esau.                               On account of the impi-
           ous slaughter of thy brother Jacob, shame shall cover thee,
      11 and thou shalt be cut off forever.                            From the day that thou
           didst become an adversary, whenever the Philistines captivat-
           ed his army, or strangers entered his gates and cast lots on Je-
      12 rusalem, thou also wast as one of them.                                  But thou shouldst
            not have looked on thy brother's day in the day of strangers
            nor rejoiced over the children of Juda, in the day of their de-
                 VOL. II.                                4 Q
                                                                            ——
          Ch. T.                      OBADIAH.
             struction ; nor shouldst thou have vaunted in the day of afflic-
             tion ; nor entered people's gates in the day of their distresses.
          13 Thou especially shoulclst not have beheld their congregation
             in the day of their destruction, nor joined to fall on their army
          14 in the day of their defeat ; nor beset the passes to cut off such
             of them as were escaping ; nor shouldst thou have hemmed
          15 in his fugitives, in a calamitous day.   Because the day of the
             Lord, against all the nations is near ; as thou hast done so shall
             it be done to thee : thy dealings shall be returned on thy head.
         16 For in the same manner as thou hast drunk on my holy moun-
             tain, all the nations shall be drunk up as wine.    They shall be
             drunk up and swallowed down, and be as if they had never
         17 been.    But on mount Sion shall be safety aud a sanctuary ; and
         18 the house of Jacob shall possess those who possessed them ; and
             the house of Jacob shall be a fire, and the house of Joseph, a
             flame ; and the house of Esau shall be as stubble ; and upon
             these they shall kindle and consume them, so that there shall
             not be a torch bearer to the house of Esau.        For the Lord
         19 hath spoken.    And they in Nageb shall inherit the mountain
             of Esau ; and those in Sephale shall inherit the Philistines.
             aud they shall possess mount Ephraim and the plain of Sama-
         20 ria and Benjamin and Galaaditis; and this shall be the domi-
             nion of the captivity—to the Israelites shall belong the land
             of the Chananites to Sarepta, and to the captives of Jerusa-
             lem, to Ephratha : they shall possess the cities of Nageb.
         21 And they who have been preserved, shall go up from mount
             Sion to execute vengeance on the mountain of Esau.           And
             the kingdom shall be the Lord's.
                                       JONAS.
         I.       When a word of the Lord came to Jonas the son of
          2 Amathi, saying, "Arise and go to Ninive that great city
             and proclaim in it, That the cry of its wickedness is come up
          3 to me."    Jonas arose to flee to Tharsis from the presence of
            the Lord, and went down to Joppa, and finding a ship bound
            to Tharsis, he paid his fare and went on board with a design
             to sail with them to Tharsis, from the presence of the Lord.
          4 But the Lord raised a wind on the sea, and there was a great
                                                                                                                            ;-
          Ch. II.                                            JONAS.
                tempest in the sea, so that the ship was in danger of founder
            5 ing.        And the mariners were terrified, and cried every one to
                his god, and threw overboard some of the cargo, to lighten
                the vessel.           Now Jonas had gone down into the ship's hold,
            6 and was asleep and snoring.                            And the master of the ship came
                to him and said to him, What ! art thou snoring ?                                           Arise and
                call on thy God, that thy God may save us, and that we may
            7 not perish.             Then they said, one to another, Come let us cast
               lots and know on whose account this calamity is come on
           8 us.        So they cast lots, and the lot fell upon Jonas.                                          Where-
               upon they said to him, Tell us.                            What is thy business ?                      And
                whence comest thou?                         And of what country, and of what
           9 people art thou ?                   And he said to them, I am a servant of the
               Lord; and I worship the Lord God of heaven, who made
         10 the sea and the dry land.                          Upon this the men were greatly ter-
               rified and said to him, Why hast thou done this ?                                              (For the
               men knew that he was fleeing from the presence of the Lord,
         11 ibr he had told them.)                         Then they said to him, What shall we
               do to thee that the sea may be calmed for us ?                                            For the sea
         12 rolled and grew more and more tempestuous.                                                    And Jonas
               said to them, Take me up and throw me into the sea, and the
               sea will be calm for you ; for I know that on my account this
         13 great tempest is come upon you.                                  When the men had labour-
               ed hard to reach land, but could not because the sea ran
               high, and grew more tempestuous against them, then they
         14 cried to the Lord and said, Forbid it,                                      Lord, that we perish,
               for the life of this man, and bring not upon us innocent blood
               for     thou,            Lord,        hast       done according to thy pleasure.
         15 Then they took Jonas and cast him into the sea.                                              Whereupon
         16 from raging the sea became still.                                   And the men feared the
               Lord exceedingly, and offered a sacrifice to the Lord and made
               vows.
         17          Now the Lord had commanded a great fish to swallow
               Jonas, so Jonas was three days and three nights, in the belly
         II.         of the fish.            And when out of the belly of the great fish,
           2 Jonas prayed to the Lord his God, and said, In my affliction
               I cried to the Lord my God, and he hearkened to me : thou
               didst      hear my cry from the womb of Hades : thou didst
           3 hearken to my prayer : thou hast cast me into the depths of
                                                                                                                                ;
             Ch. III.                                           JONAS.
                   the heart of the sea.                      When streams encompassed me—all
               4 thy billows and thy waves passed over me.                                       Then I said, I am
                   cast out from thy sight ; nevertheless I will continue to look
               5 towards thy holy temple.                          The water was poured around me
                   to my soul ; and the lowest abyss encompassed me ; my head
               6 hath gone down into the clefts of mountains ; I have gone down
                   to a land, the bars of which are everlastingly fixed : let my
               7 soul now, corrupted as it is, ascend,                                  Lord, my God.                 When
                   my soul was fainting I remembered the Lord ; let my prayer
               8 now come to thee into thy holy temple.                                         They who worship
               9 vanities and lies have forsaken their mercy : But I will sacri-
                   fice to thee with the voice of praise and thanksgiving.                                             I will
                   pay thee what I have vowed to the Lord for my deliverance.
             10          Upon this a command was given by the Lord to the fish,
                   and it cast forth Jonas upon the dry ground.
             III.          Then a word of the Lord came to Jonas a second time
                   saying, " Arise and go to Ninive that great city, and proclaim
                   in it according to the former proclamation which I spoke to
               3 thee."          So Jonas arose and went to Ninive as the Lord had
                   spoken.          Now Ninive was an exceeding great city, of about
               4 three clays' journey.                  And Jonas began at his entering the city,
                   and for about one day's journey cried with a loud voice and
               5 said, " Yet three days and Ninive shall be destroyed"                                            And the
                   men of Ninive believed God and proclaimed a fast, and put
               6 on sackcloth from the greatest to the least.                                        When the word
                   reached the king of Ninive, he arose from his throne and
                   stripped off his robes and clothed himself with sackcloth and
               7 sat in ashes.                And proclamation was made and orders issued
                   in Ninive from the king and from his nobles, saying, With
                   regard to men and beasts, including herds and flocks, Let
                   them not taste any thing ; let them neither feed nor drink
               8 water.          So both men and beasts were covered with sackcloth
                   and there was an incessant cry to God ; and every one turned
                   from his evil way, and from the wickedness of their hands,
                9 saying, Who knoweth but God will relent and turn away
              10 from his fierce wrath, so that we may not perish.                                              And God
                    saw their works, that they turned from their evil ways.                                              And
                    God relented at the evil which he said he would do to them,
                    and did it not.
                                                                                                                 ;
       Ch. IV.                                        JONAS.
       IV.         .Thereupon Jonas was exceedingly grieved and confound-
             ed, and he prayed to the Lord and said,                               Lord were not these
         2 my words,when I was yet in my own country ? For which cause
             I attempted to flee to Tharsis.                     For I knew that thou art com-
             passionate and merciful, long suffering and abundant in kind-
         3 ness and relentest at evils.                     Now, therefore,             Sovereign Lord,
             take my life from me, for it is better for me to die than to live.
         4 And the Lord said to Jonas, Art thou very sorry—(Now Jonas
         5 had gone out of the city and sat over against it, and had made
             for himself a booth and sat under it until he should see what
         6 would befal the city.                  And the Lord had given orders to a co-
             locynthis, and it had sprung up over the head of Jonas to be a
             shade over his head to shade him on account of his sufferings ;
         7 and Jonas was exceeding glad of the colocynthis.                                       But early
             the next morning God gave orders to a worm and it smote the
         8 colocynthis and it withered.                      And when the sun rose God or-
             dered a burning wind to spring up and the sun beat upon Jo-
             nas' head so that he became fainty and abandoned himself to
         9 despair and said, It is better for me to die than to live.                                      And
       10 God said to Jonas, Art thou very sorry) for the colocynthis. And
             he said I am sorry even to death.                          Thereupon the Lord said,
             Thou hast compassion for the colocynthis, for which thou hast
             not toiled and which thou hast not nourished, which sprang
        11 up in a night and perished in a night.                              And shall not I have
             compassion on Ninive this great city, in which there are more
             than one hundred and twenty thousand of the human species,
             who know not their right hand and their left; and also much
             cattle.
                                                      MICAH.
        I.           (p) X word of the Lord came to Micah the Morasthite in
             the days of Joatham and Achaz and Ezekias kings of Juda
             with regard to those things which he saw touching Samaria
          2 and touching Jerusalem, Hear,                            peoples, words ! and let this
             land attend and all who are in it                             And let the Lord, Lord
          3 among you be a witness—the Lord from his holy temple.                                            For
             behold the Lord is coming forth from his place; and he will
          4 come down and walk on the heights of this land ; and under
                                                                                                                                ;
               Ok. II.                                           MICAH.
                    him the mountains will tremble, and the vallies shall melt like
                    wax before fire, and be like water rolling down a precipice.
                 5        (J) All this is on account of the impiety of Jacob, and
                    for the sin of the house of Israel.                             What is the impiety of Ja-
                 6 cob ? Is it not Samaria ? And what is the sin of the house of Ju-
                     da? Is it not Jerusalem ?                      Therefore I will make Samaria like a
                    hut of a field and like a plant of a vineyard, and I will drag the
                7 stones thereof into a ditch and lay her foundations bare.                                               And
                    all her graven images shall be hack'd to pieces ; and all her earn-
                    ings shall be burned with fire ; and all her idols I will utterly
                    destroy.
                          Because from the earnings of fornication she collected, and
                8 from the earnings of fornication, amassed ; therefore she shall
                    wail and utter lamentations : she shall walk barefoot and naked
                    she shall utter a wailing like that of jackals ; and moanings like
                    the daughters of the ostrich.
                9         Because her wound is large ; because it hath come even to
              10 Juda and reached the gate of my people, even to Jerusalem ; mag-
                    nify not yourselves ye men of Gath, and ye Enakims, rebuild
                    not from a house, in derision.                        According to your derision you
              11 shall sprinkle yourselves with dust.                                   Sennaar, who dwelt at
                    ease in her cities, went not forth to bewail a neighbouring
                    house ; from you she shall receive a painful wound.
              12          Who led the way to good for her who was dwelling in sor-
                    rows, because evils from the Lord, a sound of chariots and
              13 horsemen came down against the gates of Jerusalem?                                                   Was it
                    the inhabitant of Lachis ?                      She is a leader to sin for the daugh-
                    ter of Sion.            Because in thee have been found the impieties of
              14 Israel, therefore even to the inheritance of Gath he will give
                    up idolatrous houses as abandoned.                                 To the kings of Israel
              15 they were of no avail.                           inhabitant of Lachis ! until the true
                    heirs shall be brought in—0! Odollam ! until an inheritance,
              16 the glory of the daughter of Israel shall come, shave thy locks
                    and make thyself bald for thy delicate children ; lengthen out
                    thy widowhood like an eagle, for they shall be carried from
                    thee into captivity.
              II.          They planned mischief; they contrived evils on their beds,
                    and soon as it was day they executed them ; for they did not
                2 lift up their hands to God.                        They coveted fields and plundered
                    orphans and tyrannised over houses ; they plundered a man and
                                                                                                               ;
      Ch. TIL                                       MICAH.
        o his household—a man and his inheritance ; therefore thus saith
            the Lord, Behold against this tribe I am planning evils, from
            which you shall not withdraw your necks, nor walk erect sud-
        L denly.         Because it is an evil time, a parable will in that day be
           taken up against you, and a song of lamentation will be sung,
           saying, " With affliction we have been afflicted ! the portion of
           my people have been measured with a line, and there was none
        5 to hinder or turn it aside."                  Your fields have been parcelled out,
           therefore there shall be none to stretch a line for thee by lot,
        6 in the congregation of the Lord.                           Weep not bitterly, nor let
           tears be shed for these things, for reproaches will not be cast oft*
        7 even by him who saith, " The house of Israel hath provoked
           to wrath the spirit of the Lord.                       Are not these his purposes ?
           Are not his words good with him ?                             Have these walked in a
        8 straight course ? "              Indeed this people of mine have openly risen
           up for enmity.            In direct opposition to his peace they have even
           stripped off his skin, that the extreme horror of war might de-
           stroy hope.
        9        The leaders of my people shall be hurled from their houses
           of pleasure ; for their wicked devices they have been expelled
      10 draw ye near to the everlasting mountains.                                 Arise and depart,
           for this is not a rest for thee.                    By reason of impurity you are
      11 utterly corrupted: you have been put to flight when there was
           no pursuer : a spirit hath set up a lie : it hath dropped on thee
      12 for wine and plenty.                 Yet it shall come to pass that from a drop
           of this people, Jacob with all his sons shall be gathered toge-
            ther.     With expectation I will expect the remnant of Israel.                                   I
            will place together them who are about to return.                                  Like sheep
           in distress, like a flock in their fold, they shall rush out from
      13 among men through a breach before them.                                   They have broken
           through and passed the gate; they are gone through it and
           their king is gone out before them ; and the Lord will be their
           leader, and he will say,
      III.         Hear these things ye children of the house of Jacob, and
           ye remnant of the house of Israel, is it not your business to
        2 know judgment?                  As for them who hate good and seek evil,
           who tear off the skin from these and the flesh from their bones :
        o as they have devoured the flesh of my people and have flayed
           off their skin from them ; and have broken their bones and
          2
         Cli. IV.                            MICAH.
             chopped them up, as flesh for a kettle and as pieces of meat for
          4 a pot : so they shall cry to the Lord but he will not hearken to
             them ; but will turn away his face from them at that time, be-
             cause by their devices they have committed evil against these.
          5      II.   THUS saith the Lord against the prophets who led
             my people astray, who gnash with their teeth and proclaim
             peace for them, though it was not put in their mouths ; they
          6 have raised up war against them.              Therefore from vision you
             shall have night ; and from prophesying you shall have dark-
             ness.   And the sun shall set upon the prophets, and upon them
          7 the day shall darken : and the seers of dreams shall be put to
             shame ; and the diviners shall be laughed to scorn, and reviled
          8 by all ; for none will hearken to them.            None but I can, by the
             spirit of the Lord, supply strength both of judgment and
             might to declare to Jacob his impiety and to Israel his sins.
          9      (p) Hear these things I beseech you, ye leaders of the
             house of Jacob, and ye remnant of the house of Israel, who ab-
         10 hor judgment and pervert all equity, who are building up Si-
             on with blood and Jerusalem with injustice.
         11      (J) Her rulers have judged for rewards; and her priests
             have given answers for hire ; and her prophets have prophesied
             for silver, without waiting for the Lord, saying, "Is not the
         1   Lord among us?          No evils shall come upon us : " therefore be-
             cause of you, Sion shall be ploughed like a field ; and Jerusa-
             lem shall be like a temporary building for summer fruits ; and
             the mountain of the house shall be for a grove of a forest.
         IV.       But it shall come to pass in the last of these days, that the
             mountain of the Lord shall be conspicuous : it shall be establish-
             ed on the tops of the mountains, and raised high above the
          2 hills ; and peoples shall hasten to it.           And many nations shall
             come—they will say, " Come, let us go up to the mountain of
             the Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob ; that they may
             point out to us his ways, and that we may walk in his paths."
             For out of Sion shall go forth a law ; and the word of the Lord
           3 from Jerusalem.       And he will judge among many peoples, and
             rebuke nations of extensive power.            And they shall beat their
             swords into ploughshares, and their spears into pruning hooks.
             Nation shall no more lift up a sword against nation ; nor shall
                                      MICAH.
      Ch. V.
       4 they any more learn to fight. But they shall rest every man un-
         der his own vine, and every man under his own fig tree ; and
         there shall be none to make them afraid.
             (p)   Because the mouth of the Lord Almighty hath spoken
       5 these things—because all the people will walk every one in
         his own way, let us therefore walk in the name of the Lord
         our God until that age and beyond it.
       6     (J) In that day, saith the Lord, I will gather her that hath
         been bruised ; and take back her who was cast off and them
       7 whom I had put away : and I will make the bruised a rem-
         nant, and her who was put away, a mighty nation.             And the
         Lord will reign over them on mount Sion henceforth and for-
       8 ever.    And as for thee, thou squalid tower of a flock, thou
         daughter of Sion ; to thee he will come, when the chiefdom,
         the first royal government shall have come from Babylon for
       9 the daughter of Jerusalem.         Now therefore why hast thou
         known evils ?     Was there no king for thee ?      Or was thy coun-
         sel destroyed, that pangs of a woman in travail have seized
      10 thee ?   Be in pangs, but take courage and draw near to delivery,
            daughter of Sion.     For thou art now to go from a city and
         to make thy abode in a field, and go even to Babylon.          Thence
         he will deliver thee ; yes, thence the Lord thy God will redeem
      11 thee out of the hands of thine enemies.        Now indeed many na-
         tions are assembled against thee, saying, "Let us rejoice ex-
      12 ceedingly and let our eyes look upon Sion."        But they did not
         know the determination of the Lord nor understand his coun-
         sel.  Because he hath gathered them as sheaves for a threshing
      13 floor, arise daughter of Sion and tread them out.          Because I
         will make thy horns iron and thy hoofs I will make brass ;
         therefore thou shalt break many peoples in pieces, and devote
         the multitude of them to the Lord, and their substance to the
         Lord of the whole earth.
      V.     (p) Now shall a daughter be hedged in with a hedge.            He
         hath ordered a siege against us.
             (J) With a rod they will smite on the cheek the tribes of
       2 Israel.   But as for thee, Bethlehem, thou house of Ephratha,
         art thou too little to be one of the chiliads of Juda ?   Out of thee
         one shall come forth for me to be the chief of Israel.        His go-
         ings forth have been from the beginning—from the days of
             VOL. II.                     4 R
                                                                                                                   ;;
          Oh. VI.                                       MICAH.
            3 an age.          Therefore he will continue them till the time of one
                bringing forth.            She shall bring forth and the rest of their bre-
            4 thren shall turn to the children of Israel.                           And they will stand
                and look and the Lord will feed his flock with majesty ; and in
                the glory of the name of the Lord their God they shall subsist
                because they shall now be magnified to the ends of the earth
                therefore she shall have peace.
             5      Asfor Assur, when he hath come against your land, and when he
             6 hath passed over your country ; against him shall be raised up
                seven shepherds. And there shall be eight bites of men and they
                will feed Assur with a sword and the land of Nebrod in its enclo-
                sure.      So he will deliver from the Assyrian, when he hath come
             7 against your land and when he hath passed over your borders.
                And theremnant of Jacob shall be among the nations in the midst
                 of many people, like dew falling from the Lord and like lambs
                 upon the wilds.
             8        That none may be ungathered or left behind among
                 the children of men, the remnant of Jacob shall be among
                 the nations in the midst of many peoples, like a lion among
                 beasts of the forest, and like a young lion among flocks
                 of sheep ; so that when he passeth through and hath made a
             9 choice, he may tear and there shall be none to deliver.                                         Thy
                 hand shall be raised up against them who afflict thee ; and all
            10 thine enemies shall be utterly cut off. And it shall come to pass
                 in that day, saith the Lord, that I will destroy the horses from
            11 the midst of thee and destroy thy chariots and I will root out
            12 the cities of thy land and demolish thy fortifications.                                     And I
                 will cut off thy sorceries out of thy hands and in thee shall be
            13 no diviners.            And I will cut off thy graven images and thy pil-
                  lars from the midst of thee; and thou shalt no more worship
            14 the works of thy hands.                     And I will cut down the groves from
                  amidst thee and utterly destroy thy cities; and with indigna-
                  tion and with wrath I will execute vengeance among the na-
                  tions because they have not hearkened.
             VI.         III.     (p)     HEAK, I beseech you, a word.                       The Lord, Lord,
                  hath commanded.
                        (J)     Arise ;     come to judgment before the mountains ; and
                  let the hills hear thy voice !
               2        (p)     Hear ye mountains the controversy of the Lord !                                And
       1
     Oh. VI.                              MICAH.
         ye vallies the foundations of the earth !              For the Lord hath a
      3 controversy with his people, and with Israel he will plead.
         my people, what have I done to thee ?                   Or wherein have I
       4 grieved thee ?      Orwhat molestation have I given thee ?              Answer
         me.     For I brought thee up out of the land of Egypt, and re-
          deemed thee out of the house of bondage, and sent before thee
       5 Moses and Aaron and Mariam.                   my people call now to re-
          membrance what counsel Balak kiug of Moab took against
          thee; and what answer was made him by Balaam son of Beor,
          That from Schoinon the righteousness of the Lord may be
          made known to Galgal.
       6      (Balak.) " By what mean shall I gain over the Lord ?                  Shall
          I take him for my God most high ?               Shall I gain him over by
       7 whole burnt offerings—by calves of a year old ?                 Will the Lord
          accept me for thousands of rams or myriads of fat goats ?                 Must
          I give my first born for iniquity—the fruit of my body for the
          sin of my soul."
       8      (Balaam.)      "Must thou,           man, be told what is good?
          What doth the Lord require from thee, but to do justice and to
          love mercy, and to be prepared to walk with the Lord thy God ? "
       9       (6)   Let the voice of the Lord be proclaimed in the city
          and it will save them who fear his name.
               (J)   Hear,      tribe !   Who is the man that will adorn a city ?
      10 Will fire and the house of an unrighteous man [do it ?] Or he
          who is treasuring up unlawful treasures and iniquities with
      1   haughtiness ?       Will an unrighteous man be justified by a ba-
          lance, or false weights by a bag with which they have increas-
      12 ed their wicked wealth ?           As they who inhabit it have spoken
      13 lies and their tongue hath been exalted in their mouth ; there-
          fore I will begin with smiting thee—I will make thee desolate
      14 for thy sins.      Thou shalt eat but shalt not be satisfied.           Though
           darkness come and warn thee thou shalt not escape ; and if
      15 any escape, to the sword they shall be delivered up.                        Thou
           shalt sow but thou shalt not reap.            Thou shalt press the olive,
           but shalt not anoint thyself with oil.          You shall make wine, but
           shall not drink it.       And the ritual services of my people shall
       16 be utterly destroyed.         As thou hast kept the statutes of Zam-
           bri, and all the works of the house of Achab ; and you have
           walked in their ways, that I might deliver thee up to desola-
                                                                                !                                                        ;
             Ch. VII.                                              MICAH.
                   tion, and the inhabitants of this city to hissing ; therefore you
                   shall bear the reproaches of peoples.
             VII.             (p) Woe is me ! for I am like one picking up stalks in
                   harvest, and like one gathering a gleaning at the vintage ? Not
               2 a bunch of the first fruits is left for me to eat.                                              Ah woe is my
                   life, that the pious is perished from the land, and among men
                   there is not an upright man left
                          (J) They are all indicted for capital crimes : they griev-
               3 ously afflict every man his neighbour : they are preparing their
                   hands for evil.                 The chief asketh and the judge hath spoken
                   words of peace !                 He is entirely at his devotion ; therefore I will
              4 take away their good things, like a consuming moth advanc-
                   ing regularly in the clay of visitation.
              5          (p) Alas ! alas ! thy punishments are come ; now will their
                   lamentations be—" Trust not in friends, nor confide in rulers,
                   against the wife of thy bosom be on thy guard—to trust no-
              6 thing to her : for a son dishonoureth a father ; a daughter will
                   rise up against her mother ; a daughter in law against her mo-
                  ther in law ; all a man's household are his enemies."
              7          (c) But as for me I will look to the Lord ; I will wait for
                  the God who is my saviour; he who is my God will hearken
              8 to me.               Kejoice not over me,                                 mine enemy, because I
                  have fallen.               I shall rise again, for though I sit in darkness the
              9 Lord will give me light.                                I will bear the indignation of the
                  Lord, because I have sinned against him ; until he vindicate
                  my cause.               He will do me justice and bring me out into light
            10 and shame shall cover her who saith, "Where is thy God?"
                  Mine eyes shall see her.                           She shall now be trodden down like
                  dirt in the streets.
            11           (J) The day for anointing a plinth—that day will be the
                  unanointing of thee, that day will indeed destroy thy ritual ser-
            12 vices.           And thy cities shall become plains and be distributed
                  among the Assyrians : even thy fortified cities shall be for dis-
                  tribution, from Tyre to the river and from sea to sea, and from
            13 mountain to the mountain.                                  And the land shall be for deso-
                  lation with them who inhabit it, for the fruits of their devices.
                                                     (c) The chorus, or Sion.
        5                                                                                                     ;:
      Ch. VII.                                       MICAH.
      14         (p)     Feed thou thy people with thy crook—the flock of
           thy heritage—them who are by themselves in a forest in the
           midst of yonder Carmel.
                 (J)     They shall feed in Bashan and Gilead, as in the days
      1    of old.       And as in the days of thy coming out of Egypt, you
      16 shall see wonderful things.                     Nations shall see and be confound-
           ed, and because of all the mighty power of these, they will
           lay their hands on their mouths.                          Their ears will be stopped.
      17 They will lick dust like serpents trailing on the ground ; they
           will be confounded in their enclosure.
      18         (p)     At the Lord our God let them be confounded and
           struck with terror because of thee.                          Who is a God like unto
           thee, taking away iniquities, and passing by the transgressions
           of the remnant of his heritage ?                        He hath not kept his anger
      19 in remembrance ; because he delighteth in mercy ; he will
           turn and have compassion on us: he will bury deep our ini-
           quities : they shall be whelmed in the depths of the sea.                                       All
           our sins he will give up for truth to Jacob, as an act of mercy
           to Abraham as he sware to our fathers, according to the days
           which have been heretofore.
                                                  NAHUM.
                                         The sentence on Ninive.
     I.                The book of the vision of Nahwm, the Elkosite.
       1        God is zealous.              The Lord is about to take vengeance
       2 the Lord is about to take vengeance with wrath : the Lord
           is about to take vengeance on his adversaries, and to destroy
           utterly his enemies, himself.
       3        (a)     The Lord is slow to anger, though his power is great
           will not the Lord then acquit the innocent ?                              Is his way in de-
           struction and whirlwind, when clouds are the dust of his feet ?
       4 When he rebuketh the sea he maketh it dry, and drieth up all
           the rivers.        Bashan and Carmel are diminished and the bloom
                                 (a) An objection,           (b) The answer.
                                                                                                                                            ;;
              Oh. II.                                              NAHUM.
                5 of Libanus languished.                             At him the mountains quake and the
                    hills tremble ; at his presence the earth is startled—the world
                6 and all its inhabitants.                         At the presence of his wrath who can
                    stand, or who can resist his fierce indignation?                                                    His wrath
                    dissolveth governments, and by him the rocks are rent to
                    pieces.
                7          (b)       The Lord is kind to them who wait for him in a
                     day of distress: and he knoweth them who reverence him.
                8 When with a deluging march he maketh destruction; them
                     who raise themselves up and are his enemies, darkness shall
                    pursue.
                9          What are you devising against the Lord?                                               He will make
                     complete destruction, and not punish twice by distress for
              10 the same thing.                        Because one shall be utterly destroyed, and
               11 consumed like bindweed and dry stubble ; shall a reasoning
                     against the Lord proceed from thee,                                           'wicked city, devising
               12 things in opposition?                            Thus saith the Lord, With respect to
                     the ruler of many waters ! they shall be so dispersed, that
               13 what thou hearest shall be heard no more.                                                  I will now break
               14 his sceptre from thee, and burst the bands asunder.                                                       Concern-
                     ing thee the Lord will command, let none of thy name be
                     sown any more.                     From the house of thy G-od I will root out
                     the graven and molten images ; " I will make it a sepulchre
                     for thee."
               15           (p)       Because yonder on the mountain are the swift feet of
                      one bringing good news—even of one announcing peace
                      O Juda, solemnize thy festivals ; pay thy vows ; for they shall
                      no more proceed to pass through thee for conflict.                                                  It is com-
                      pletely laid waste, entirely removed.
                II.          Into thy presence came up panting one who is delivered
                      from affliction. Watch the way ; strengthen thy loins ; act man-
                  2 fully with all thy might, since the Lord hath averted contume-
                      ly from Jacob, as he did reproach from Israel, since emptiers
                      have emptied them out and destroyed their branches—the in-
                       struments of their tyranny from among men—their mighty men
                  3 insulting with fire. In the day of his preparation the reins oftheir
                       chariots, and the horsemen will be disordered in their ranks
                  4 and the chariots will justle together and be entangled with one
                       another in the streets.                       The appearance of them is like flaming
                                                                                                                                       !:
      Ch. III.                                              NAHUM.
        5 torches and like streamy lightning.                                        Their grandees will recol-
             lect and flee by day ; but they shall be weak in their march.
             While they shall be hasting to her walls, and preparing their
         6 out guards ; the gates of the cities are opened, and the pala-
         7 ces are fallen.                    And the empress herself is exposed to view ;
             even she herself is gone up, and her maids are led along coo-
         8 ing plaintively like doves, in their hearts.                                             As for Ninive, her
             waters are like a standing pool.                                      They who fled away made
         9 no halt, nor was there one who looked back.                                                    They plundered
             the silver ; they plundered the gold ; but of her furniture there
             was no end; every one is loaded with her precious utensils.
       10 What quaking and driving ! what groans and heart breaking
             what feebleness of knees and pangs in every loin ! what black-
       11 ness, like that of a pot, on the countenance of all ! where is the
              habitation of the lions, and the feeding places of the young
             lions?          Where had the old lions gone, that a young lion en-
       12 tered and there was none to scare him ?                                           The old lion had seiz-
              ed enough for his whelps, and had strangled for his lionesses,
              and had filled his hole with prey, and his den with ravin
       13 behold I am against thee saith the Lord Almighty, and I will
              burn out thy multitude with smoke ; and a sword shall devour
              thy lions : and I will cut off thy prey from the earth ; and of
              thy deeds nothing more shall be heard.
       III.                  bloody city, wholly perfidious and full of lies ! shall
          2 not thy prey be handled ?                                A sound of whips ! and the sound
              of the rumbling of wheels, and of the pursuing horse ! and
          3 bounding chariot ! and of the cavalry advancing ! and of the
              glittering sword and gleamy arms ! and of the multitude of
              wounded ! and of the hideous crash !                                           Though there was no
              bound to her nations, they shall be weak of body by reason
              of great fornication.
          4:               fair     harlot and bewitching mistress of sorceries, who
              sellest nations by thy whoredom, and peoples by thy sorce-
          5 ries ! behold I am against thee, saith the Lord God Almighty,
               and I will expose thy skirts to view; and shew nations thy
          6 shame ; and kingdoms, thy dishonour : and cast abomination
               on thee according to thine impurities; and make thee a pub-
               lick example, so that every one who seeth thee shall go down
               from thee, and say, Wretched Kinive ! who can bemoan her ?
               Whence can I find comfort for her ?
                                                                                                                      ;
                     III.                                  NAHUM.
              Ch.
               8        Prepare a funeral cake ! attune the lyre ! prepare the funeral
                   cake ofAmnion ! she dwelt among rivers ; water was around her.
               9 The sea was her dominions, and water, her walls, and Ethiopia
                   and Egypt, her strength ; and the end of her flight was not stop-
              10 ped and the Lybians were her auxiliaries.                             Yet she is to go cap-
                   tive into banishment ; and her infants shall be dashed to the
                   ground at the head of all the streets); and for all her splendid
                   treasures lots shall be cast ; and all her grandees shall be bound
             11 with fetters.            And as for thee thou shalt be made drunk and be
                   despised, and shalt seek for thyself a resting place from ene-
             12 mies.         All thy fortresses are like figs which have watchers
             13 when shaken they will fall into the mouth of the eater.                                     Behold
                   thy people in thee are like women ; the gates of thy land shall
                   be opened wide to thine enemies; a fire shall utterly devour
             14 thy bars.            Draw thee water for a siege, and fortify thy bul-
                   warks.        Go down into the clay, and let him be trampled with
             15 straw.         Make it harder than any brick.                        There a fire shall de-
                   vour thee; a sword shall cut thee off.                           Like a locust it will
                   devour thee ; and like a brouchus locust thou shalt be afflicted.
             16 Thou hast multiplied thy merchandise, above the stars of hea-
             17 ven ; the brouchus came rushing on, and is flown.                                       Thy mer-
                   chandise is swept away like the attelebos locust—like the
                   small locust mounted on a hedge, in a cold day : the sun broke
                   out and they are swept away, and their place is not known.
             18 Alas for them! thy shepherds slumbered; an Assyrian king
                   lulled to sleep thy mighty men : thy people fled to the moun-
             19 tains and there was none to rally them.                               There is no cure for
                   thy bruise.         Thy wound is festered.                  All that hear the news of
                  thee will clap their hands at thee.                         For upon whom hath not
                  thy wickedness come continually ?
                                        AMBAKUM OR HABAKKUK
                               The vision which Ambakum the prophet saw.
               2        (p)     How long, O Lord shall I cry, and thou not hearken ?
                   How long shall I being injured cry to thee, and thou not save ?
               3 Why hast thou pointed out to me to behold labours and sor-
                                                                                                                                        !
          Ch. II.                                          HABAKKUK.
                rows, misery and impiety?                               A suit is instituted against me
                and the judge receiveth [bribes] therefore law is disregarded
            4 and the cause is not brought to an issue.                                                Because a wicked
                man oppresseth the just, therefore wrong judgment will be
                given.
            5          (J) See ye despisers ! and view intently and be amazed
                at wonderful things and vanish.                                  For in your days I am doing
                a work which you will not believe though one tell you.
            6 For lo ! I am raising up the Chaldeans that bitter and hasty na-
                tion, which marcheth over the breadth of the earth, to possess
            7 dwellings which belong not to them.                                          He is terrible and illus-
                trious; his judgment will be from himself, and from himself
            8 his prophesy will proceed.                                His horses can out leap leopards
                and are swifter than the lynxes of Arabia.                                              When his horse-
                men have mounted, they will rush impetuously from afar, and
            9 will fly like an eagle, eager for prey.                                    Destruction will come on
                the wicked who set themselves against him; and he will ga-
          10 ther captives like the sand.                               He indeed will riot in kings ; and
                petty princes will be his scorn.                               Of every fortress he will make
          11a scoff and will raise a mount and take it.                                           Then he will change
                his mind and depart and be pacified.
          12           (p) This is the majesty which belongeth to my God.                                                         Art
                not thou from everlasting ?                                   Lord, my God, my Holy One
                let us not die.                  Thou,              Lord, hast appointed this for judg-
                ment : and formed it that its correction may work conviction
          13 in me.              Thine eye is too pure to behold wicked deeds, or to
                look on the labours of sorrow.                                  Why lookest thou upon des-
                pisers?           Wilt thou be silent when the wicked swallow up the
          14 righteous ?                 Wilt thou make these men like the fishes of the
          15 sea, and like those reptiles which have no leader?                                                          He hath
                 drawn up destruction with a hook, and hath dragged out one
                 with a dredge, and enclosed another with his sweep net.                                                          For
          16 this cause he will rejoice and his heart will be glad ; therefore
                he will sacrifice to his net and burn incense to his dredge.                                                      Be-
                 cause by these he made his mess rich and his food delicious,
                 shall he on the account of this cast his dredge, and not spare
                 to slay nations continually ?
          11           I will stand on my watch and go up upon a rock and
                 look around, that I may see what he will say to me and what
                        VOL. II.                                       4 s
             II.                   HABAKKUK.
         Ch.
            answer I shall receive to my expostulation.   And the Lord an-
            swered and said,
                (J) Write a vision: write it distinctly in a book that the
            reader may trace these things ; for the vision is for a time yet
            to come.   But it will spring up at last and will not be vain.
            Though he may tarry, wait for him ; for he will assuredly come
            and will not fail. If any one draw back my soul hath no plea-
            sure in him.  But the just shall live by faith in me.
          5    Now this arrogant and contemptuous man—this man of
            boasts shall not exceed a certain bound.   He enlarged his soul
            like Hades and like death was not satisfied.     When he shall
            have gathered to him all the nations and received for himself
            all the peoples, will they not all take up a parable against
            him and a fable to tell of him, saying, Wo to him who is heap-
            ing up for himself things which do not belong to him? For
         7 how long ?    And making his yoke grievously heavy. For biters
            of him shall start up suddenly.   And the plotters against thee
         8 shall be sober and thou shalt be plunder for them.       Because
            thou hast plundered many nations, all the remaining peoples
            shall plunder thee for the blood of mankind, and for the im-
            pieties of a land and a city and of all them who inhabit it.
         9 Wo to him who coveteth wicked gain for his house, that he
        10 may raise his nest high to be out of the reach of evils.    Thou
            hast contrived shame for thy house ; thou hast provoked many
        11 peoples and thy soul hath sinned ; for a stone out of a wall
            will cry out, and a worm from a beam will proclaim these
            things.
        12     Wo to him who buildeth a city with blood and furbish-
        13 eth up a city with iniquities !   Are not these things from the
          Lord Almighty ?     When many nations have fainted by fire,
        14 and many peoples have been dispirited, that the earth may be
            filled with a knowledge of the glory of God.  Like water it will
            cover them.
        15     Wo to him who maketh his neighbour drink a foamy in-
            toxicating draught, making him drunk that he may inspect his
        16 caves.   Because of thy glory drink thou also a full draught of
            dishonour, and be confounded at heart and shaken.      The cup
            of the right hand of the Lord is come round to thee and dis-
        17 honour is heaped upon thy glory.     For the impiety at Libanus
                                                                                                                           ;
                III.                                  HABAKKUK.
         Ck.
               shall cover thee and the sufferings of wild beasts shall terrify
               thee, on the account of the blood of mankind, and for the
               wickedness of a land and a city and of all them who inhabit it.
         18 Of what avail is a graven thing, that they have engraved it?
               Did one cause a molten mass, a false fantasy, to be cast, be-
               cause the caster had a confidence that by casting he would
         19 make dumb idols?                        Wo to him who saith to wood, Awake;
              arise.       And to stone, be thou exalted.                          The one is indeed a fan-
        20 tasy ; and the other, a plating of gold and silver : there is no
              breath in it.            But the Lord is in his holy temple.                                Let all the
              earth be awed at his presence.
        III.         The Prayer of Ambahum the prophet; with an Ode.
          2              Lord, I have heard the report of thee and am terrified
              I have considered thy works and am struck with amaze.                                                     In
              the midst of two living beings thou wilt be known ; when the
              years draw nigh thou wilt be acknowledged ; when the time is
              come thou wilt be pointed out : when my soul is troubled, in
          3 wrath remember mercy.                           God will come from Thaiman, even
              the Holy One from the thick shady mountains of Pharan.
          4 His glory obscured the heavens ; and the earth was full of his
              praise.        His splendor will be like light—beaming rays in his
              hands, which impressed a lasting love of his 3Iajesty.
          5         Before him Logos [the word] will march, and advance into
          6 the plain.            He stood and the earth was shaken : he looked, and
              nations melted away : the mountains were violently convulsed,
          7 the everlasting hills melted.                           Instead of labours I beheld his
              marches of old.                The dwellings of the Ethiopians shall be ter-
          8 rifled !       And the tents of the land of Madian ! Wast thou,
              Lord, angry with the rivers ?                           Or was thy wrath against the
              rivers ?        Or thine indignation against a sea, that thou shouldst
          9 mount thy horses ?                     Thy riding is indeed salvation.                         Thou hast
              bent thy bow effectually against sceptres.                                The Lord saith, " The
        10 land of rivers shall be broken; peoples shall see and be in
              pangs."          Thou art scattering the rolling waters.                              The deep roar-
        11 ed.         It swelled high.               The sun was withdrawn : and the moon
              stood on its orbit.                Thy bolts will glance for light, for a glare
        12 of the lightening of thine arms.                             With a threat thou canst dimi-
       Ch. III.                    HABAKKUK.
       13 nish a land, and with wrath crush nations.       Thou hast marched
           forth for the salvation of thy people, to save thine anointed
           One.   Thou wilt pour death on the head of transgressors, thou
       14 hast raised chains up to the neck.      Thou hast struck with con-
           sternation the heads of mighties, at this they will be appalled !
           They will slacken their reins and be like a poor man eating
       15 in secret, whilst thou art pressing into the sea thy horses ruf-
           fling a mighty water.
       1G     I watched myself; and at the sound of the prayer of my
          lips my bowels trembled and a tremor seized my bones; and
          under me my whole frame quivered.          I shall be at rest in the
          day of affliction, at the time of his coining to the people of
       17 my neighbourhood.      Since the fig tree will not flourish, nor will
          there be fruit on the vines ; the product of the olive will fail*
          and the fields will supply no food—For want of food the flocks
       18 have failed, and there are no kine in the stalls ; As for me, I
          will rejoice in the Lord ; I shall have joy for God my saviour.
       19 The Lord God is my strength, and will guide my feet to the
          end.   He maketh me walk in high places ; that I may triumph
           with his song.
                                   SOPHONIAS.
       I.     THE word of the Lord which came to Sophonias the Ghusite,
           the son of Godolias son of Amorias, son of Ezekias in the days
           of Josias son of Amos king of Juda.
        2     Let there be a total failure from the face of this land, saith
        3 the Lord.    Let man and beast perish.      Let the birds of the air
           and the fishes of the sea perish.    As for the wicked, they shall
           be without strength ; and I will remove transgressions from the
        4 face of this land, saith the Lord.   I will indeed stretch forth my
           hand against Juda, and against all the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
           And I will remove out of this place the names of Baal and
        5 the names of her priests ; and them who worship the host of
           heaven on the house tops—both those worshippers and them
           also who swear by the Lord and who swear also by their king ;
           and them who turn aside from the Lord, and them who seek
           not the Lord, and them who cleave not to him.        Be struck with
           awe, at the presence of the Lord God, for the day of the Lord
      1
    Ch. II                       SOPHONIAS.
        is near at hand.    Because the Lord hath prepared his sacrifice
     8 and hallowed his guests ; therefore it shall come to pass in the
        day of the sacrifice of the Lord, that I will execute vengeance
        on the chiefs and on the house of the king, and on all them who
      9 are clothed with strange apparel.    And I will punish publicly be-
        fore the gates, on that day, them who fill the house of the Lord
    10 their God with impiety and deceit.        And it shall come to pass
        in that day, saith the Lord, that there shall be a sound of shout-
        ing from the gate of the warriors, and a doleful lamentation
        from the second gate, and a great crashing from the hills.
    1       Raise the song of woe, ye who inhabit the stormed city ; be-
        cause all the people are like Chanaan.     And they who were elat-
    12 ed with silver are to be all cut off.    Therefore it shall come to
        pass in that day, that I will search Jerusalem with a lamp, and
        execute vengeance on the men who are despisers—upon their
        stores.  And as for them who say in their hearts, "The Lord
        will neither do good nor harm," their wealth shall be for plun-
    13 der ; and their houses, for desolation.   Though they build hous-
        es, they shall not inhabit them ; and though they plant vine-
    14 yards ; they shall not drink the wine thereof ; because the great
        day of the Lord is near—is near and hasting with great speed.
        The sound of the day of the Lord is bitter, and dreadful things
    15 are ordained : that day will be a mighty day of wrath ; a day
        of tribulation and distress : a day of wasting and desolation ; a
    16 day of gloom and darkness; a day of clouds and thick dark-
        ness ; a day of the trumpet and shouting against the fortified
    17 cities and against the lofty towers.      And I will bring distress
        upon the men and they shall walk as if blind.         Because they
        have sinned against the Lord, therefore he will pour out their
    18 blood like dust and their flesh as duns;.      And their silver and
        their gold shall not be able to deliver them, in the day of the
        indignation of the Lord.    By the fire of his zeal the whole land
        shall be consumed, for he will bring speedy destruction on all
        the inhabitants of this land.
    II.     Assemble and make joint supplication,           unimproved na-
      2 tion, before you become like a flitting flower—before the wrath
        of the Lord come upon you—before the day of the fierce an-
      3 ger of the Lord reach you.      Seek the Lord all ye meek of the
        land ;  exercise judgment and seek righteousness, and live an-
               HI.                     SOPHONIAS.
          Oh.
             swerably ; that you may be sheltered in the day of the anger of
           4 the Lord.    For Gaza shall be plundered and Ascalon shall be
             a waste ; and Azotus shall be driven out at noon day ; and Acca-
             ron shall be rooted out.
           5     (J)   Alas for them who inhabit the sea coast—the emi-
             grants from Crete ! a word of the Lord is against you in Cha-
             naan, the land of the Philistines, and I will destroy you from
           6 your habitations.     And Crete shall be a pasture for flocks and
           7 a fold for sheep ; and the coast shall be for the remnant of
             the house of Juda.     They shall feed upon them.        In the houses
             of Ascalon they will lie clown in the evening for fear of the
             children of Juda.      Because the Lord their God hath visited
           8 them ; therefore he will bring back their captivity.      I have heard
             the revilings of Moab and the buffets of the children of Am-
             nion, with which they have reproached my people, and mag-
           9 nified themselves against my borders : therefore as I live, saitli
             the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, Moab shall be like So-
             dom and the children of Ammon like Gomorra; and Damascus
             shall be left like the heap of a winnowing floor, and shall be
             desolate forever, that the remnant of my people may spoil them :
          10 and the remains of my nation shall inherit them.             This they
             shall   have for their haughtiness, and their reproaches and
          11 for magnifying themselves against the Lord Almighty.               The
             Lord will display himself illustriously against them, and will
             root out all the gods of the nations of the earth, and all the
             isles of the nations shall worship him, every one from his place
          12 —even you Ethiopians are the victims of my sword.              And he
          13 will stretch forth his hand against the north, and destroy the
          14 Assyrian and make Ninive a desolation—dry as a desart : and
             in the midst of it flocks shall feed and all the wild beasts of
             the land.   In its stalls the chameleons and porcupines shall make
             their beds ; and wild beasts shall utter their voice in its vaults,
          15 and ravens in its gates ; for a cedar is the only relict of it.    This
             is the scornful city which dwelleth securely, which saith in
             her heart, " I am and there is none besides me.          How it is be-
             come a desolation, the haunt of wild beasts !         Every one who
             passeth through it will express his pity and shake his hands.
          III.     (p)   Oh! the illustrious and redeemed city !         This dove
             hearkened not to a voice.       She received not instruction : she
             trusted not in the Lord ; nor did she draw near to her God : her
       2
     Ch. III.                       SOPHONIAS.
      3 chiefs within her were like roaring lions, and her judges like the
      4 wolves of Arabia.       They left nothing for the morning : her pro-
         phets are enthusiasts, arrogant men : her priests profane the
      5 holies and unhallow the law : But the righteous Lord is in the
         midst of her and will not do an unjust thing.                Every morn-
         iug he will bring his judgment to light : for it was not hidden ;
         nor did he countenance injustice for solicitation, nor make in-
         justice successful.
      6      (J)   With destruction I drag'd down the proud.                   Their
         towers were made desolate.         I will make their highways entire-
         ly waste, that none may travel them.          Their cities are destroyed
      7 so that there is not a man—not an inhabitant.              I have spoken.
         Nevertheless fear me, and receive instruction and you shall not
         be cut off out of her sight.      All that I have inflicted on her, re-
         pair thou.    Arise betimes.
      8      (p)    All the gleanings of them are spoiled.
             (J)    On that very account, wait thou for me, saith the
         Lord, until the day of my resurrection for a testimony.           For this
         judgment of mine is for the assemblies of nations ; to admit
         kings, to pour out all the fury of my wrath on them.               For by
      9 the fire of my zeal all this land shall be utterly destroyed, that
         I may then bring back upon peoples a tongue for its genera-
         tion, that they may all invoke the name of the Lord—that they
     10 may serve him under one yoke.            From the ends of the rivers of
         Ethiopia I will expect them; among my dispersed they shall
     11 bring sacrifices for me.        In that day thou shalt not be put to
         shame for all thy devices, which thou hast impiously devised
         against me ; because I will then take away from thee those tri-
         fles which occasion thy haughtiness, that thou mayst no more
     1   continue to boast of my holy mountain ; and I will then expect
         in thee a meek and lowly people ; and the remnant of Israel
      13 will revere the name of the Lord, and no more commit iniqui-
          ty, nor speak vain things; nor shall a deceitful tongue be
          found in their mouth.
              (p)   Because they shall feed and lie down and there shall
      II be none to make them afraid.            Kejoice,      daughters of Sion,
          Make proclamation,          daughters of Jerusalem !        Be glad and
      15 rejoice with thy whole heart,            daughter of Jerusalem.         The
          Lord hath taken away thy transgressions ; he hath redeemed
                                                                                                          —:;
              Cb. III.                             SOPHONIAS.
                   thee out of the hand of thine enemies.                      The king of Israel
                   the Lord is in the midst of thee ; thou shalt no more see evils.
              16        At that time the Lord will say to Jerusalem, " Take cou-
              17 rage, Sion.         Let not thy hands hang down.                  The Lord thy God
                   is with thee.       The Mighty one will save thee.               Hewill bring thee
                   gladness and renew thee in his love ; and rejoice over thee with
              18 joy as in the day of a festival ; when I have gathered those of
                   you who have been bruised."
                        (J)    Ha ! who is this that hath taken up a reproach against
              ] 9 her ? Behold here am I—I am dealing with thee for thy sake
                   at that time, saith the Lord, and I will save her who hath been
                   trodden down ; and take back her who hath been put away
                   and I will make them a boast and renowned in every land.
              20 And they shall be ashamed at that time when I deal kind-
                   ly with you.        Even at the time when I take you back.                         For I
                   will make you renowned and a boast among all the people of
                   the earth, when I bring back your captivity before their eyes,
                   saith the Lord.
                                                      HAGGAI.
              I.       IN the second year of Darius the king, in the sixth month,
                   on the first day of the month, a word of the Lord came by the
                   ministry of Haggai the prophet, saying,
                        Say to Zorobabel the son of Salathiel of the tribe of Juda,
                2 and to Jesus the son of Josedek the high priest, these words
                   Thus saith the Lord Almighty, This people say, The time is
                3 not come to build the house of the Lord.                         Now a word of the
                4 Lord is come by the ministry of Haggai the prophet, saying, Is
                   it indeed time for you to dwell in your cieled houses, whilst
                5 this house of ours is lying waste ?                Now therefore thus saith the
                6 Lord Almighty, Turn your thoughts on your ways.                               You have
                   sown much and gathered little.                  You have eaten but have not
                   had enough.          You have drunk, but not plentifully; you have
                7 clothed yourselves, but have not been warmed.                            And he who
                   earned wages put it in a bag with holes.                     Thus saith the Lord
                8 Almighty apply your thoughts to these ways of yours : Go up
                   to the mountain and cut timber.                   Build this house that I may
                9 take pleasure in it and be glorified, saith the Lord.                         You have
        II.                     HAGGAI.
    Ch.
       looked for much, but little came ; and when it was brought home
       I biowed upon it on this account, saith the Lord, because my
    10 house is waste and you attend every one to his own house ;
       therefore the heaven shall refrain from dew and the earth shall
    11 withhold her products ; and I will bring a sword on this land
       and on the mountains, and on the corn, and on the wine, and
       on the oil even on all that the earth produceth, and on the men
       and on the cattle and on all the labours of their hands.
    12     Thereupon Zorobabel, the son of Salathiel, of the tribe of
       Juda, and Jesus the son of Josedek the high priest, and all the
       remnant of the people hearkened to the voice of the Lord their
       God and to the words of the prophet Haggai, as the Lord their
       God had sent him to them.    And when the people were terrifi-
    13 ed at the presence of the Lord, then Haggai, a messenger of
       the Lord among the messengers of the Lord to the people,
    14 said, " I am with you saith the Lord."    And the Lord stirred
       up the spirit of Zorobabel the son of Salathiel of the tribe of
        Juda, and the spirit of Jesus the son of Josedek the high priest,
       and the spirit of all the remnant of the people and they went
       and worked at the house of the Lord Almighty their God on
       the four and twentieth day of the sixth month in the second
       year of Darius the king.
    II.    In the seventh month, on the twenty first day of the month,
     2 the Lord spoke by the ministry of Haggai the prophet, say-
       ing, Speak now to Zorobabel the son of Salathiel of the tribe
       of Juda, and to Jesus the son of Josedek the high priest, and
     3 to all the remnant of the people, saying, Is there any of you
        who hath seen this house in its former glory ? How then must
     4 you look upon this now as a mere nothing before you !       But
        be strong now Zorobabel, saith the Lord; and be strong, Je-
        sus son of Josedek the high priest ; and be strong all ye peo-
        ple of the land, saith the Lord, and work : for I am with you
     5 saith the Lord Almighty, and my spirit is in the midst of you.
     6 Be of good courage ; for thus saith the Lord Almighty, Yet
        once more, I will shake the heaven and the earth including the
     7 sea and dry land, and I will convulse all the nations ; and the
        choice things of all the nations will come, and I will fill this
     8 very house with glory, saith the Lord Almighty.    The silver is
     9 mine and the gold is mine, saith the Lord Almighty.     Because
           VOL. II.                 4 T
                                                                     —;,:
                                  HAGGAI.
       Ch. II.
          the glory of this house shall be great, the latter greater than
           the first, saith the Lord Almighty ; therefore in this very place
           I will give peace, saith the Lord Almighty—even peace of
           mind for a possession to every one active in again raising up
           this temple.
        10    On the twenty fourth of the ninth month, in the second
           year of Darius, a word of the Lord came to Haggai the prophet
        11 saying, Thus saith the Lord Almighty, Ask the priests the
        12 law, saying, If a man take holy flesh in the skirt of his mantle
           and the skirt of his mantle touch bread, or pottage, or wine, or
        13 oil, or any kind of food, will they be hallowed ? Andthe priest in
           reply, said, No.Then Haggai said, If a polluted person—one
           who is unclean by a dead body touch any of these things will
        14 they be polluted? And the priests answered and said, They will
           be polluted. Thereupon Haggai said in reply, So is this people
           and so is this nation before me, saith the Lord : and so are all
           the works of their hands. And whoever shall come near there
           shall be polluted because of their morning burdens.Are they
           to be afflicted with grief on account of their toils ?And have
        15 you hated a reprover in the gates ? Eecollect now, I beseech
           you, from that day back, before there was a stone laid upon a
        16 stone in the temple of the Lord, What were ye ?   When you
           came to measure twenty measures of barley, it was become
           ten. And when you went to the wine lake to draw off fifty mea-
        17 sures, there were only twenty.I smote you with blasting and
           mildew and hail in all the works of your hands when you turn-
        18 ed not to me, saith the Lord.  Turn now your thoughts from
           this day forward, from this twenty fourth of the ninth month
           and from the day on which the foundation of the house of the
        19 Lord is laid, lay up in your minds whether that will be the
           case in the threshing floor ? whether the vine or the fig tree or
           the pomegranate or the olive tree will any more be unproduc-
           tive ?  From this very day I will bless.
        20     Moreover a word of the Lord came a second time to Hag-
        21 gai the prophet on the twenty fourth clay of the month, saying,
            Say to Zorobabel the son of Salathiel of the tribe of Juda
            Say, H I will shake the heaven and the earth including the sea
         22 and the dry land, and I will overthrow the thrones of kings and
            destroy the power of the kings of the nations : and I will over-
                                    —
     Ch. II.                                HAGGA1.
         throw the chariots and the charioteers ; and horses and their ri-
          ders shall come down every one with a sword against his bro-
     23 ther.      On that day, saith the Lord Almighty, I will take thee
          Zorobabel the son of Salathiel my servant, saith the Lord,
          and make thee a signet, because I have chosen thee, saith the
          Lord Almighty.
                                        ZACHAEIAS.
     I.          In the eighth month of the second year of Darius, the
          word of the Lord came to Zacharias the Barachite, the son
      2 of Addo, the prophet, saying, The Lord was very angry with
       3 your fathers, therefore thou shalt say to them, Thus saith the
          Lord Almighty, Turn to me, saith the Lord of Hosts and
       4 I will turn to you saith the Lord of Hosts.                     And be not like
          your fathers to whom the former prophets called, saying,
          " Thus saith the Lord Almighty, Turn from your evil ways
          and from your wicked devices," but they hearkened not, nor
       5 gave attention to listen to me, saith the Lord.                        As for your
          fathers, where are they ?          And the prophets, will they live for-
       6 ever ?     But receive ye my words and my statutes—all that I,
          by my spirit, give in charge to my servants the prophets, who
          reached your fathers, when they addressed them and said,
          iC As the Lord Almighty determined to deal with us according to
          our ways, and according to our devices, so hath he dealt with us."
       7       II.   ON the twenty fourth of the eleventh month, which
          is the month Sabat, in the second year of Darius, the word of
          the Lord came to Zacharias, the Barachite, the son of Addo,
          the prophet, saying
       8       (I had been viewing the night and lo ! a man mounted on a red
          horse, and he stood between the shady mountains, and behind him
       9 were horses, red and ash coloured, and dappled and white.                      And I
          said, Lord what are these : and the angel who was talking with me
      10 said to me, I will shew thee what these are.                   Then the man who
          stood between the mountains, addressing me said, These are they
      11 whom the Lord sent to go round this land.                    Then they addressed
          the angel of the Lord who stood between the mountains, and said.
          We have gone round all this land, and lo all the land is inhabited,
      12 and quiet.       And the angel of the Lord, answered and said, O Lord
                                                              )                                                                  ;!;
                      II.                                  ZACHARIAS.
              Ch.
                    Almighty, how long wilt thou not have mercy on Jerusalem, and
                    the cities of Juda, which thou hast overlooked those seventy years ?
               13 And the Lord Almighty answered the angel, who had been talking
              14 with me, with good determinations, and comfortable words.                                             Where-
                    upon the angel who had been talking with me said to me—He cried
                    with a loud voice saying—
              15          Thus saith the Lord Almighty, I have been jealous of Je-
                    rusalem and Sion with great jealousy : and with great wrath
                    I am angry with the nations who were set on.                                          Because I was
                    indeed a little displeased, but they were bent on mischief
              16 therefore thus saith the Lord, I will turn to Jerusalem, with
                    compassion and my house shall be rebuilded in it, saith the
                    Lord Almighty, and a line shall be stretched on Jerusalem.
              17          And again the angel who had been talking with me, said
                   to me—Again he cried with a loud voice and said, Thus
                   saith the Lord Almighty, Again shall cities abound with pros-
                   perity.        And again the Lord will compassionate Sion and make
                   choice of Jerusalem.
             18          Then I lifted up mine eyes and looked, and lo, four horns
                   and I said to the angel who was talking with me, Lord, what
              19 are these ?               And he said to me, These are the horns which
             20 have scattered Juda and Israel and Jerusalem.                                           Then the Lord
             21 shewed me four carpenters.                            And I said, What are these going
                   to do ?         And he said, Those four horns which scattered Juda
                   and Israel are broken, and not one of them hath raised a head
                   now these are come to sharpen for themselves those four
                   horns, namely the nations which lifted up a horn against the
                   land of the Lord, to scatter it.
             II.          Then I lifted up mine eyes and looked, and lo ! a man with
               2 a measuring line in his hand ! and I said to him, Whither
                   art thou going?                  And he said to me, To measure Jerusalem
               3 to see how broad it is, and what is its length.                                             Now behold
                   the angel who had been talking with me had stopped—and
               4 another angel came out to meet him and spoke to him saying,
                   " Eun and speak to that young man and say," Jerusalem shall
                   be crouded with inhabitants by reason of the multitude of
               5 men and cattle therein.                       And I will be to her, saith the Lord,
                   a wall of fire around ; and I will be a glory in the midst of her.
               6              flee !     flee from the land of the north, saith the Lord,
                   for from the four winds of heaven I will gather you, saith the
                                                                                                                                   :
               III.                                    ZACHAEIAS.
       Ch.
         7 Lord.            To Sion make your escape, ye who inhabit the daugh-
         8 ter of Babylon ! for thus saith the Lord Almighty.                                                   He behind
             glory hath sent me against the nations which plundered you
         9 for he who toucheth you, is like one touching the apple of
             his eye.           For behold I am bringing my hand upon them ; and
             they shall be spoils for them who were their vassals : and you
             shall know that the Lord Almighty hath sent me.
       10           Kejoice and be glad,                              daughter of Sion ! for lo ! I am
       11 coining ; and I will dwell amidst thee, saith the Lord; and
             many nations will flee to the Lord in that day, and be his peo-
             ple and dwell in the midst of thee ; and thou shalt know that the
       12 Lord Almighty hath sent me to thee.                                          And the Lord will settle
             Juda in his portion, in the                               holy land ; and will again make
       13 choice of Jerusalem.                          Let all flesh be struck with awe, at the
             presence of the Lord, for he is risen up from his holy clouds.
       III.           Then the Lord shewed me Jesus the high priest stand-
             ing before the angel of the Lord, and Satan stood at his right
         2 hand to oppose him.                           And the Lord said to Satan, The Lord
             rebuke thee, Satan ! even the Lord who hath chosen Jerusa-
             lem, rebuke thee ! lo ! is not this like a brand snatched from
         3 fire?          (Now Jesus was clothed with filthy garments and stood
         4 before the angel.)                          Then [the Lord] addressing them who
             stood before him, spoke, saying, Take away from him those
             filthy garments                   (and to him he said, Behold I have taken
                                            ;
         5 away thy transgressions) and clothe ye him with a flowing
             robe and put on his head a clean mitre.                                           And when they had
             put a clean mitre on his head and clothed him, then the angel
         6 of the Lord stood up.                            And the angel of the Lord protested
          7 to Jesus saying, Thus saith the Lord Almighty, If thou wilt
             walk in my ways, and keep my statutes, thou shalt judge
             my house.               And if thou wilt carefully watch my court I will
              give thee men conversant with these attendants.
          8         Hearken now,                    Jesus the high priest, thou and they near
              thee who sit in presence, since they are men who typify won-
              derful things: since lo ! I am bringing my servant Anatole,
          9 [the Day-spring ;] since with regard to that stone which I
              have set before Jesus, upon that one stone there are seven
              eyes; behold I am digging a pit saith the Lord Almighty,
       10 and I will feel all the iniquity of this land in one day.                                                   In that
         Ch. IV. V.                 ZACHARIAS.
             day, saith the Lord Almighty, you will be inviting every one
             his neighbour under a vine, and under a fig tree.
         IV.     Then the angel who talked with me turned and roused
             me, as when a man is roused from his sleep, and said to me,
          2 what dost thou see ? And I said, I have looked and lo ! a can-
             dlestick all of gold with the lamp dish on the top of it ; and se-
             ven lamps on the top of it ; and seven pipes, for the seven lamps
          3 on the top of it ; and two olive trees over it, one on the right of
          4 its lamp dish and the other on its left.     Then I inquired and
             spoke to the angel who was talking with me, and said, Lord
          5 what are these ?    And the angel who was talking with me, an-
             swered and said to me, Dost thou not know what these are ?
          6 When I said, No, lord.        Then he answered and said to me,
             This is the word of the Lord to Zorobabel, saying,
                Not by mighty power nor by strength, but by my spirit
          7 saith the Lord Almighty.        Who art thou ; to complete this
             mountain—this great one—this before Zorobabel !         I will in-
             deed bring out the stone of the inheritance, an equality of
             favour, a free gift of it.
          8     Then a word of the Lord came to me saying, The hands
          9 of Zorobabel have laid the foundation of this house, and his
             hands shall finish it : and thou shalt know, (since the Lord
         10 Almighty hath sent me to thee, since a certain person hath
             despised these as small days,) that those seven eyes will be
             gladdened, when they shall see the plumb-line in the hand of
             Zorobabel ; they are the eyes which survey the whole earth.
         11     Then I answered and said to him, What are those two olive
         12 trees which are on the right and left of the candlestick ?     And
             I inquired a second time and said to him, What are those two
            branches of the olive trees which are in the handles of those
             two funnels of gold, which are pouring into and supplying
         13 the golden pipes?     And he said to me, Dost thou not know
             what these are ?   And when I said, No, lord.       Then he said
             to me, These are the two sons of fatness.      They stand before
             the Lord of the whole earth.
         V.     Then I turned and lifted up mine eyes and looked, and
             lo ! a flying sickle. And he said to me, What dost thou see?
          3 And I said, I see a flying sickle twenty cubits long, and ten
             cubits broad.   Whereupon he said to me, This is the curse
                                                                                   ;
          VI.                       ZACHAKIAS.
    Ch.
        which is scorns forth over the face of the whole earth.               Since
        every thief on the one hand is to be punished with death,
        and every false swearer on the other hand is to be punished
      4 therefore I will bring it out saith the Lord Almighty; and it
        shall enter into the house of the thief, and into the house of
        him who sweareth by my name to a falsehood ; and it shall
        lodge in his house, and destroy it with the timber and the
        stones thereof.
      5      Then the angel who was talking with me went out and
        said to me, Look up with thine eyes and see this which is
      6 going out.     And I said, What is it ?       And he said, This is the
        measure which is going away.            Then he said, This is the ini-
      7 quity of them in all this land.         Then lo ! a talent of lead was
        brought out ; and lo ! a woman was seated in the midst of the
      8 measure.     And he said, This is the iniquity.           Then he threw
        her down into the measure and he threw the mass of lead on
      9 her mouth.      And I lifted up mine eyes and looked, and lo ! two
        women came out, and there was a wind by their wings.                   Now
    10 they had the wings of a stork.           And when they had lifted up
        the measure between heaven and earth, I said to the angel
    11 who was talking with me, Whither are they carrying the mea-
        sure ?   And he said to me, To build a house for it in the land
        of Babylon and make preparation that they may place it there
        on its base.
    VI.       Then I turned, and lifting up mine eyes I looked, and lo !
        four chariots came out from between two mountains.                And the
        mountains were mountains of brass.            In the first chariot were
        red horses, and in the second chariot black horses, and in the
        third chariot white horses, and in the fourth chariot bay spot-
     4 ted horses.      Whereupon addressing the angel who was speak-
        ing with me, I said, Lord, what are these ?          And the angel who
      5 was talking with me answered and said, These are the four
        winds of heaven.       They are going out to wait on the Lord
      6 of the whole earth.       That in which were the black horses went
        out to the land of the north ; and the white went out afterthem ;
      7 and the spotted went out to the land of the south ; and the bay
        went out and looked with an intent to go round this land : and
      8 he said, Go and scour round this land.             And when they had
        scoured round this land he cried aloud and spoke to me, say-
                                                                                                                                             ;
               Ch. VII.                                         ZACHAEIAS.
                      ing, Behold they who went to the land of the north have ap-
                      peased my wrath in the land of the north.
                  9          Then a word of the Lord came to me, saying, Take the
                10 gifts of the captivity [which are coming] from their chiefs and
                      from those who have been kind to the captives and from those
                      who have taken notice of them ; and on that same day thou
                      shalt go to the house of Josias son of Sophonias who is com-
                11 ing from Babylon : and thou shalt take silver and gold and
                      make crowns and put one on the head of Jesus the son of Jo-
                12 sedek the high priest and say to him, Thus saith the Lord
                      Almighty, Behold a man! his name is Anatole [Day-spring]
                      underneath him he shall spring up.                                        And he shall build the
                13 house of the Lord.                         And he shall take authority and sit and
                      rule on his throne ; and there shall be a priest on his right hand;
                14 and there shall be a counsel of peace between both.                                                        And the
                      crown shall be for them who wait, and for them who have been
                      kind to the captives, and for them who have taken notice of
                      them, as a token of the gratitude of the son of Sophonias, and
                15 as a psalm in the house of the Lord.                                            And they who are far
                      from them shall come and dwell in the house of the Lord
                      and you shall know, (since the Lord Almighty hath sent me to
                      you,) that this indeed will come to pass, if you will hearken di-
                      ligently to the voice of the Lord your God.
                VII.             III.       AND it came to pass in the fourth year of Da-
                      rius the king, that a word of the Lord came to Zacharias on
                  2 the fourth of the ninth month which is Chaseleu.                                                      When the
                      king and his men sent Sarasar and Arbeseer to Baithel to con-
                  3 ciliate the favour of the Lord, saying to the priests who were
                      at the house of the Lord Almighty, and saying to the prophets,
                  4 The dedication came hither in the fifth month as it hath done
                  5 now for many years.                          Then a word of the Lord of hosts came
                      to me saying, Speak to all the people of the land and to the
                      priests, saying, Though you fasted and mourned in the fifth
                  6 and seventh months, lo ! for seventy years ; did you keep a fast
                      for me ?           And though you ate and drank ; did you not eat and
                  7 drink for yourselves?                            Were not these the words which the
                      Lord spake by the ministry of the prophets who were in for-
                      mer times when Jerusalem was inhabited and in prosperity,
    Ch. VIII.               ZACHARIAS.
       and the cities around her and the hilly country and the plain
     8 were inhabited ?Then there was a word of the Lord to Zacha-
     9 rias,saying, Thus saith the Lord Almighty, Execute just
    10 judgment and shew mercy and compassion one to another; and
       oppress not the widow, nor the orphan, nor the stranger, nor the
       poor; and let none treasure up in his heart for evil an injury
    11 done by his brother; but they refused to attend and turned
       back contemptuously ; and stopped their ears that they might
    12 not hear; and made their heart disobedient that they might
       not hearken to my law; therefore (according to the words
       which the Lord Almighty by his spirit sent by the ministry
       of the former prophets) there was great wrath from the Lord
    13 Almighty; that it might come to pass as he said, "As they
       hearkened not, so they shall cry and I will not listen, saith the
       Lord Almighty, and I will cast them out into all the nations
       which they knew not ; and the land behind them shall be a de-
       solation, without a traveller and without a sojourner."
   VIII.     Now a word of the Lord Almighty is come saying,
     2 Thus saith the Lord Almighty, I have had a great jealousy of
       Jerusalem and Sion, and with great wrath I have been jealous
     3 of her. But thus saith the Lord, I will return to Sion, and I
       will dwell in the midst of Jerusalem; and Jerusalem shall be
       called a city of truth ; and the mountain of the Lord Almighty,
    4 a holy mountain.   Thus saith the Lord Almighty, Again old
       men and matrons shall sit in the streets of Jerusalem, every
     5 one with his staff in his hand, for multitude of days ; and the
       streets of the city shall be filled with boys and girls playino* in
     6 her streets.Thus saith the Lord Almighty, If this shall ap-
       pear impossible in the view of the remnant of this people in
       these clays; shall it also be impossible in my view, saith the
     7 Lord Almighty?    Thus saith the Lord Almighty, Behold I
       will save my people from the land of the east and from the
     8 land of the west. And I will gather them and dwell in the
       midst of Jerusalem ; and they shall be my people and I will be
       their God in truth and in righteousness.
     9    Thus saith the Lord Almighty, Let your hands be strong, ye
       who in these days hear these words from the mouth of the pro-
       phets, from the clay the foundation of the house of the Lord Al-
       mighty was laid and during the time the temple hath been a
          VOL. II.               4 u
                                                                                                                     ;;
            Ch. VIII.                                ZACHAKIAS.
            10 building. For before those days, the earnings of the men could be
                  of no avail, and the earnings of the cattle could not be lasting
                 nor could there be any security from affliction to him who
                  went out or to him who came in.                       For I set all the men every
            11 one against his neighbour.                      But I will not now deal with the
                  remnant of this people, as in the former days, saith the Lord
            12 Almighty : but will shew peace.                         Their vine shall yield its fruit.
                  And the earth shall yield its products ; and the heaven shall shed
                  its dew ; and I will cause the remnant of this people to inherit
            13 all these things.               And it shall come to pass, that as you, the
                  house of Juda and the house of Israel, were for a curse among
                  the nations ; so I will save you, and you shall be for a blessing.
            14 Be of good courage and let your hands be strong, for thus
                  saith the Lord Almighty, In the same manner as I thought of
                  afflicting you, when your fathers provoked me, saith the Lord
             15 Almighty and I relented not ; so 1 have determined and have my
                  mind bent, in these clays, on prospering Jerusalem and the
                  house of Juda.              Be of good courage.                   These are the things
             16 which ye shall do—Speak truth every one to his neighbour;
                  administer the judgment of truth and peace in your gates ; and
             17 devise not evil in your hearts every one against his neighbour
                  and love not a false oath : for all these things I hate, saith the
                  Lord Almighty.
             18        Then a word of the Lord Almighty came to me, saying,
                  Thus saith the Lord Almighty, The fourth fast, and the fifth
             19 fast, and the seventh fast, and the tenth fast shall be to the house
                  of Juda for joy and gladness and for cheerful festivals, and ye
            20 shall rejoice.            Therefore love truth and peace.                       Thus saith the
                  Lord Almighty, There shall yet come many peoples ; and the
             21 inhabitants of many cities—even the inhabitants of five cities
                  shall come together to one city, saying, Let us go to pray be-
                  fore the Lord and to seek the face of the Lord Almighty.                                     I am
             22 going.         So many peoples and many nations will come to seek
                  the face of the Lord Almighty at Jerusalem, and to conciliate
             23 the favour of the Lord.                     Thus saith the Lord Almighty, If in
                  those days ten men of all the tongues of the nations take hold,
                  they must take hold of the skirt of a Jew, saying, We will go
                  with thee, for we have heard that God is with you.
    Ch. IX.                  ZACHAEIAS.
    IX.       IV.   *A BUBDEN of the word of the Lord.
           In the land of Sedrach and Damascus is his sacrifice, because
        the Lord hath an eye over men, particularly over all the tribes
        of Israel : in Hemath also—in the borders thereof.
     2     As for Tyre and Sidon, because they were very prudent,
     3 therefore Tyre built for herself bulwarks, and treasured up sil-
     4 ver like dust, and collected gold like dirt in the highways ; but
        on account of this the Lord will take possession of them, and he
       will smite her power into the sea ; and she shall be consumed
     5 by fire. Ascalon shall see and be terrified ; so shall Gaza, and be
       exceedingly pained : Akkaron also ; because at her fall she was
       confounded.   And a king shall perish out of Gaza; and Asca-
     6 Ion shall no more be inhabited.   And strangers shall dwell in
     7 Azotus.  And I will destroy the pride of the Philistines, and
       take away their blood out of their mouths, and their abomi-
       nations from between their teeth.  But they themselves shall
       be left for our God and shall be like a captain of a thousand
     8 in Juda; and Akkaron shall be like a Jebusite. And I will sta-
       tion for my house a guard not to be passed nor repassed. And
       the plunderer shall no more come against them ; for now I have
       seen with mine own eyes.
     9     Rejoice exceedingly, O daughter of Sion !   Make procla-
       mation,   daughter of Jerusalem !  Behold thy king is coming
       for thee. He is righteous and a saviour.He is meek and mount-
    10 ed on an ass, even a young colt.     He will destroy chariots
       out of Ephraim and horses out of Jerusalem : and the bat-
       tle bow shall be destroyed.And there shall be a multitude and
       peace from the nations ; and he shall rule over waters to the sea,
    11 and over rivers to the ends of the earth.As for thee, thou by the
       blood of thy covenant hast sent forth thy prisoners out of a pit
    12 which hath no water.   You the prisoners of the congregation
       shall be placed in strong holds, and for thy one day's sojourn-
    13 ing I will make thee twofold compensation.   For I have bent
       thee Juda, a bow for myself and filled it with Ephraim; and I
       will raise up thy sons,  Sion, against the sons of Greece, and
    14 I will handle thee as the sword of a warrior.Let but the Lord
       be against them and he will dart out like a thunderbolt. The
       Lord Almighty will sound a trumpet, and march in the bil-
                  * See the note at the close of this volume.
                                                                                         —                           ;
            Ch. X.                                    ZACHAKIAS.
            15 low of his threat.                The Lord Almighty will protect them, and
                 they shall consume them and overwhelm them with sling stones
            16 and drink them np as wine and fill the phials as an altar.                                  In that
                  day the Lord their God will save them—his people like a flock.
                       Because holy stones are rolled on his land.
            17         Because if there be any thing good it is his, if any thing
                  comely it is his; with regard to com for the youths, and fla-
            X.         vourous wine for virgins, ask ye of the Lord, rain in its
                  season, the former and latter rain.                        The Lord hath made ap-
                  pearances, and he will give rain in plenty—to every one herb-
              2 age in his field.               Because the prophesiers spoke of labours,
                  and the diviners told false visions and lying dreams—gave
                  false comfort, therefore they were dried up.                              Like sheep they
              S were afflicted.            Because there was no healing ; against the shep-
                  herds my wrath is kindled; but over the lambs I will keep
                  a strict watch.            The Lord God Almighty will indeed watch
                  over his flock, the house of Jucla, and he will array them as
              4 his comely horse in battle.                      When from him he hath looked,
                  and from him drawn up in array; then from him shall issue
                  forth the wrathful bow, from him every one who sallieth out
              5 at the same time.                  And they shall be like warriors trampling
                  dirt in the highways, and shall be drawn up in array for bat-
                  tle.     Because the Lord is with them, therefore the riders on
              6 horses shall be put to shame.                     And I will strengthen the house
                  of Juda, and save the house of Joseph, and settle them in their
                  houses, because I have loved them : and they shall be as if
                  I had not cast them off; for I am the Lord their God and I
               7 will hearken to them : and they shall be like the warriors of
                   Ephraim ; and their heart shall be gladdened as with wine ; and
                   their children shall see and be made glad ; and their heart shall
               8 rejoice in the Lord.               I will make a signal for them and receive
                   them, for I will redeem them and they shall multiply as they
               9 have done.           Though I sow them among peoples, yet they who
                   are far off will remember me.                       They shall nurture up their
             10 children and return : and I will bring them back out of the
                   land of Egypt; and gather them from amongst the Assy-
                   rians ;    and bring them to Galaaditis and Lebanon and not
              11 one of them shall be left behind.                          And they shall cross over a
                   narrow sea and lash waves at sea ; and all the depths of rivers
                                                                 —
   Ch. XL                    ZACHAKIAS.
       shall be dried up, and all the haughtiness of the Assyrians
       shall be removed; and the sceptre of Egypt shall be taken
    12 quite away.  And I will strengthen thern in the Lord their
       God, and in his name they shall boast ; saith the Lord.
    XL      Open thy gates, O Libanus and let a fire devour thy
     2 cedars. Kaise the mournful cry,   pine tree, since the cedar is
       fallen, because the mighty are in great distress.Howl ye oaks
     3 of Basan, because the thick planted forest is rooted up.   A
       sound of shepherds singing the song of woe, because their
       greatness is involved in distress; a sound of lions roaring, be-
       cause the swelling of the Jordan hath distressed them.
     4    Thus saith the Lord of Hosts, you are feeding the flock
     5 prepared for slaughter, which the possessors were slaughter-
       ing, and spared not ; and they who sold them said, "Blessed
       be the Lord for we are enriched," and their shepherds had no
     6 feeling for them.  Therefore I will no more spare the inha-
       bitants of this land, saith the Lord.Now behold I deliver up
       the men, every one into the hand of his neighbour, and into
       the hand of his king ; and they shall smite the land, and I will
     7 not deliver out of their hand.  Again I will feed the flock of
       the slaughter for Chananitis ; and I will take me two staves,
       one I had called Beauty, and the other I called Portion; and
     8 I will feed the flock, and remove three shepherds in one
       month; and my soul will be weighed down against them.
     9 For as their souls roared against me, therefore I said, I will
       not feed you, What is dying let it die ; and what is fainting
       let it faint.And as for the rest, let them devour every one
    10 the flesh of his neighbour. And I will take my staff Beauty
       and throw it away, that I may break my covenant which I
    11 made with all these tribes. And on that day it shall be bro-
       ken; and the Chananites, the sheep that are kept for me, shall
    12 know for what cause there is a word of the Lord.  Then I will
       say to them, If it seemeth good in your sight, give me my
       wages; if not, forbear. And when they had weighed for my
    13 wages thirty pieces of silver; then the Lord said to me, Put
       them in the smelting furnace, and let me see whether it be
       proof: as I have been proved for them.   So I took the thirty
       pieces of silver and threw them down in the house of the
    14 Lord, for the smelting furnace. Then I threw away the other
              XII.                   ZACHABIAS.
          Ch.
             staff Portion, that I may break the jointenancy between Juda
             and Israel.
          15     Then the Lord said to me, Take thee yet the pastoral
          16 utensils of an unskilful shepherd ; for behold I am about to
             raise up a shepherd against this land, who will not visit what
             is fainting, nor seek what is scattered ; nor heal what is bruis-
             ed; nor lead aright what is sound ; but will devour the flesh
          17 of the choice, and tear their joints asunder.        ye feeders of
             vanities who have forsaken the sheep.    There is a sword against
             his arms, and against his right eye.      Shall his arm be quite
             withered, and his right eye utterly put out ?
         XII.      V.   THE burden of the word of the Lord against Israel.
             The Lord who stretcheth out the heaven and layeth the foun-
             dation of the earth, and formeth the spirit of man within him,
           2 saith, Behold I will make Jerusalem like shaken porches for all
             the peoples around.   And by Judea there shall be a siege against
           3 Jerusalem, and in that day I will make Jerusalem a stone to
             be trampled by all the nations : every one who trampleth her
             will make her his mocking stock.     When all the nations of the
           4 earth shall be gathered against her, in that day saith the Lord
             Almighty, I will smite every horse with astonishment and his
             rider with madness.   But upon the house of Juda I will open
             mine eyes.    When I smite all the horses of the peoples with
           5 blindness, then will Juda's captains of thousands say in their
             hearts, "We shall find those for us who inhabit Jerusalem by
           6 the Lord Almighty their God."      In that day I will make Juda's
             captains of thousands like a firebrand among wood, and like a
             flaming torch among stubble.      And they shall devour on the
             right and on the left all the peoples around.      And Jerusalem
           7 shall again dwell by herself in Jerusalem.     And the Lord will
             save the dwellings of Juda as at the beginning.
                 That the boasting of the house of David may not be mag-
             nified, nor the elevation of the inhabitants of Jerusalem depend
           8 upon Juda, The Lord will indeed, in that day, spread a shield
             over the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and the weak among them
             shall in that day be like David, and the house of David like the
           9 house of God—like an angel of the Lord before them.         And it
             shall come to pass, in that day, that I will seek to destroy all
   Oh. XIII.                   ZACHABIAS.
   10 the nations that come against Jerusalem.      And when I pour on
       the house of David and on the inhabitants of Jerusalem a spi-
       rit of grace and compassion, then will they look to him whom
       they pierced, and they will mourn for him with a mourn-
       ing as for a beloved ; and be afflicted with sorrow as for a first
   11 born.   In that clay the weeping in Jerusalem will be great, like
       the weeping of a pomegranate grove cut down in the plain.
   12 And the land will mourn in separate families, the family of the
       house of David by itself and their women by themselves; the
       family of the house of Nathan by itself and their women by
   13 themselves ; the family of the house of Levi by itself and their
       women by themselves ; the family of Symeon by itself and their
       women by themselves; all the remaining families, every fami-
   XIII.      ly by itself and their women by themselves.    In that day
       every place will be opened to the house of David and to the
       inhabitants of Jerusalem for the removal and for the separation.
    2 And it shall come to pass in that day, saith the Lord of hosts,
       that I will cut off the names of the idols out of the land ; and
       there shall no more be a remembrance of them.       And I will re-
       move the false prophets and the unclean spirit out of the land.
     3 And it shall come to pass that if any man shall still prophesy,
       even his father and his mother who begot him will say to him,
       Thou shalt not live, because thou hast spoken lies in the name
       of the Lord.    And his father and his mother who begot him
     4 will bind him when he prophesieth.     And in that day the pro-
       phets shall be exposed to shame ; every one for his vision, when
       he prophesieth : and they shall be clothed with a hairy skin be-
     5 cause they lied.  And when one will say, I am not a proj)het,
       for from my youth I am a husbandman, because a husband-
     6 man begot me ; then I will say to him, what wounds are these
       in thy hands ?   And he will say, those with which I was wound-
       ed in my beloved house ?
     7       Awake,       sword, against my shepherds, and against
       my chief citizen, saith the Lord Almighty; I will smite the
       shepherds and the sheep shall be scattered and I will bring my
     8 hand on the little ones.  Andit shall come to pass, that in all the
       land, saith the Lord, two parts of it shall be cut off and die and
     9 the third part shall be left in it.  And when I have passed this
       third part through fire, and tried them as silver is tried, and
             XIV.                   ZACHAEIAS.
         Ch.
            proved them as gold is proved ; this people will invoke iny name
            and I will hear them and say, this is my people, and they will
             say, the Lord is my God.
         XIV.      Behold days of the Lord are coming, when thy spoils
          2 shall be divided in thee.    I will indeed gather all the nations
             against Jerusalem for battle, and the city shall be taken and
            the houses rifled and the women polluted.    And the half of the
          3 city shall go forth into captivity. As for the remainder of my
             people they shall not be utterly cut off.   From this city, the
             Lord indeed will come forth and draw up in array among the
          4 nations, as in the day of his array in the day of battle ; and on
            that day his feet will stand on the mount of olives over against
             Jerusalem on the east side and the mount of olives shall be
             cleft, east and west, a very great chasm.  And the half of the
            mount will lean to the north and the half of it to the south.
          5 And the valley of my mountains shall be blocked up ; and the
             valley of mountains shall be closed up even to Jasod.    It shall
          6 be blocked up as it was in the days of the earthquake—in the
             days of Ozias king of Juda.   And when the Lord my God shall
             come and all the holy ones with him, it shall come to pass that on
            that day there shall not be light ; there shall be chilness and
          7 cold during one day.    That will indeed be a memorable day to
             the Lord.  It will neither be day nor night ; but towards evening
          8 there will be light.  And on that day living water will flow out
            of Jerusalem ; the one half of it to the eastern sea and the one
            half of it to the western sea, both in summer and spring it
          9 shall be so.  And the Lord will be king over all the earth.    In
             that day there will be one Lord and his name one, enclosing
         10 for Jerusalem all the land and the desert around, from Gabea
             to Kemmon southward.     As for Kama, it shall continue in its
             place. From the gate of Benjamin to the place of the first gate,
         11 on to the gate of the corners and to the tower of Anameel, on
             to the king's wine presses there shall be dwellers in it and
             there shall no more be a curse and in the inhabitance of Jeru-
         12 salem they shall be secure.    And this shall be the plague with
             which the Lord will smite all the peoples who have warred
             against Jerusalem—their flesh shall waste away while they
             stand on their feet ; and their eyes shall melt from their sockets,
         13 and their tongue shall rot in their mouth.      And in that day
             there shall be a great dread of the Lord upon them.    And they
                                 ZAOHARIAS.
    Ch. XIV.
       will lay hold, every one, on the hand of his neighbour and his
    14 hand will be grasped in his neighbour's hand.         And Juda will
       draw up in array in Jerusalem and collect the wealth of all the
       peoples around—gold and silver and raiment in great abun-
    15 dance.   And the plague of the horses and the mules and the
       camels and the asses—that of all the cattle in those camps shall
    16 be the same as this plague.     And it shall come to pass that all
       who are left of the nations which came against Jerusalem shall
       come up every year to worship the Lord Almighty and to cele-
    17 brate the festival of tabernacles.   And it shall come to pass that
       whosoever shall not come up to Jerusalem from all the tribes
       of this land, to worship the king, the Lord Almighty, even
    18 they shall be added to those.        But if the tribe of Egypt go
       not up nor come ; upon them shall be the plague with which
       the Lord will smite all the nations which come not up to ce-
    19 lebrate the festival of tabernacles.      This shall be the punish-
       ment of Egypt and the punishment of all the nations which
       decline to come up to celebrate the festival of tabernacles.
   20      In that day there shall be on the bridle of the horse, " Ho-
       ly to the Lord Almighty."         And the kettles in the house of
       the Lord shall be like the bowls before the altar.         And every
       kettle in Jerusalem and in Juda shall be holy to the Lord Al-
    21 mifrhtv.   And all that sacrifice will come and take of them and
       boil in them.    And there shall no more be a Chananite in the
       house of the Lord Almighty in that day.
                                  MALACHI.
    I.    The charge of the word of the Lord to Israel by the minis-
       try of his messenger.    Lay it up in your hearts I beseech you.
     2     I have loved you, saith the Lord.        But you said, Wherein
       hast thou loved us ?    Was not Esau the brother of Jacob ? saith
     3 the Lord : yet I loved Jacob and slighted Esau and made his
       borders a waste, and the houses of a desert his inheritance.
     4 For should he say, " Idumea is overthrown, let us return and
       build up the waste cities."       Thus saith the Lord Almighty,
       Let them build, but I will overturn.          They shall indeed be
       surnamed, " The borders of iniquity " and " A people to
     5 whom the Lord hath ever been opposed."-         And your eyes shall
           VOL. II.                   4 X
           Ch. 11.                       MALACHI.
              see and you will say, " The Lord is magnified far beyond the
              borders of Israel."
            6     A son honoureth a father ; and a servant, his master.        Now
              if I be a father, where is my honour ?       And if I be a master,
              where is my fear ? saith the Lord Almighty.
                  As for you priests, you are they who bring dishonour on
              my name.      Do you say, By what have we brought dishonour
            7 on thy name ?     By offering on mine altar polluted loaves.     And
              do you say, How have we polluted them ?             When you said,
            8 The table of the Lord is polluted, you then caused no regard
              to be paid to that which was to be laid thereon.        Since, if you
              offer the blind for sacrifices, it is not evil ; and if you offer the
              lame or sickly, it is not evil.Offer such now to thy governor, will
            9 he admit thee ?    Will he accept thy person ? saith the Lord Al-
              mighty.    Now then do you conciliate the favour of your God
              when you supplicate him ?      When such [offerings] are made by
              your hands, shall I for your sakes accept your persons? saith
          10 the Lord Almighty.       Since by you the doors will be shut, and
              a fire will not be kindled on mine altar for nothing, I have no
              pleasure in you, saith the Lord Almighty ; nor will I accept
          11a sacrifice at your hands.     Since from the risings of the sun to
              its goings down my name hath been glorified among the na-
              tions ; and in every place incense is offered to my name, and a
          12 pure sacrifice—since my name is great among the nations,
             saith the Lord Almighty, and you profane it, by your saying,
          13 " The table of the Lord is polluted," and when no regard was
              paid to the offerings laid thereon—his meats, you said, " These
              are because of affliction," and though I rejected them, saith the
              Lord Almighty, yet you offered the torn, the lame and the
              sickly ; if then you bring this sacrifice shall I accept such at
          14 your hands, saith the Lord Almighty, when he is cursed,
              who is of ability and who hath a male in his flock and his
              vow upon him, and sacrificeth to the Lord a corrupted thing ?
                 Because I am a great king, saith the Lord Almighty and
          II.     my name is illustrious among the nations, now therefore
           2 this command is for you,      priests.  If you will not hearken and
              if you will not lay it to heart to give glory to my name, saith the
             Lord Almighty, I will send that curse agaiost you and curse
             your blessing.     I will curse it;    and disperse your blessing
                                                                                                                                    ;
       Ch. II.                                              MALACHI.
              and it shall not be among you because you do not lay this to
         3 heart.            Behold I set apart for you the shoulder, now I will scat-
              ter the great intestine on your faces—the great intestine of your
         4 festivals and take you to it.                               Now you must know, since I sent
             this command to you to be my covenant with the Levites, saith
         5 the Lord Almighty, that my covenant of life and peace was
             with him ; and I gave it to him that I might be greatly feared
         6 and that he might be awed at my name.                                             The law of truth was
             in his mouth : and iniquity should not have been found in his
             lips.       Walking uprightly with me in peace, he indeed turned
         7 many from iniquity.                         Because the lips of a priest were to keep
             knowledge therefore law was to be sought from his mouth
        8 since he is a messenger of the Lord Almighty : but as for you,
             you have turned aside out of the way and weakened many by
             law.       You have corrupted the covenant of Levi, saith the Lord
        9 Almighty, therefore I have made you contemptible and out-
            casts among all the nations, because you did not keep my
            ways, but in law have had respect to persons.
      10           Have you not all one father?                                   Hath not one God created
            you? Whythen have you forsaken every one his brother ?                                                            For
            profaning the covenant of your fathers, Juda was forsaken.
      11 There was indeed abomination in Israel and in Jerusalem, be-
            cause Juda profaned the holy things of the Lord in which he
     12 delighted and studiously went after strange gods.                                                         The Lord
            will cut off the man who doth such things until he be humbled
            from the dwellings of Jacob and from among them who offer
            a sacrifice to the Lord Almighty.
     13           Moreover you have done those things which I hate.                                                         You
            have covered the altar of the Lord with tears.                                             And amidst la-
            mentations and groans for oppression is it still proper to look
     14 upon a sacrifice, or receive it acceptably at your hands ?                                                    And do
           you say, Why not?                         Because God was a witness between thee
           and the wife of thy youth whom thou hast forsaken, though
     15 she was thy companion and the wife of thy covenant.                                                                Now
           did not he who had the residue of spirit, do right ?                                                     Yet you
           have said, "What else but a seed doth God require?"                                                               But
           keep this in your mind, "Thou must not forsake the wife of
           thy youth."                                                                                        —
     16           (a) "But if thou having hated shalt put away                                                    saith       the
           Lord God of Israel."
                                                                                                                                 ;
              Cli. III.                                      MALACHI.
                           (b) And will impiety, saith the Lord Almighty put a cloak
                     over thy lusts ?             Therefore keep this in your mind, " You must
                    not forsake."
               17          You have provoked God with your sayings.                                         And do you
                     ask, By what have we provoked him ?                                By your saying, " Every
                     one doing evil doth that which is good in the sight of the
                     Lord."         Now were he well pleased with such; where then is
                     the God of Bighteousness?
               III.          Behold I am about to send my messenger and he will ex-
                     amine the way before me.                      And the Lord whom ye seek—even
                     the angel of the covenant whom you desire will come sudden-
                 2 ly to his temple.                  Behold he is coming, saith the Lord Al-
                     mighty.          And who can abide the day of his coming ?                                      Or who
                     can stand his appearance ?                      Since he is coming like the fire of
                 3 a refiner's furnace ; and like the soap of the fullers.                                     He will sit
                     refining and purifying and will purify the sons of Levi like the
                     silver and gold, and melt them like the gold and silver.
                 4 Then shall they offer to the Lord a sacrifice in righteousness
                     and the sacrifice of Juda and Jerusalem will please the Lord as
                 5 in the days of old and as in former years.                                    And I will bring to
                    judgment before you and be a swift witness against sorcerers,
                     and against adulteresses, and against them who swear by my
                     name to a falsehood, and against them who deprive the hireling
                     of his wages, and them who oppress the widow, and them who
                     buffet the fatherless, and them who turn aside the cause of the
                     stranger, and them who do not fear me, saith the Lord Al-
                 6 mighty.             Because I the Lord am your God and change not
                     but you the sons of Jacob do not abstain from the iniquities
                  7 of your fathers—you have turned aside my statutes and have
                     not kept them : turn to me and I will turn to you, saith the Lord
                     Almighty.             Do you say, Wherein shall we turn ?
                  8        Will a man supplant God?                          For you supplant me : and will
                  9 you say, wherein have we supplanted thee ?                                    Because the tythes
                     and the first fruits are with you, and you view them again and
                     again and supplant me.
                10         The year is ended and you have carried the products into
                                            (a) The objection,              (b) The answer.
                                  MALACHI.
   Ch. IV.
       your stores.   Now let that which hath been plundered from hirn
       be in his house.     Turn now in this respect, saith the Lord Al-
       mighty : (see) if I will not open for you the flood gates of hea-
       ven and pour my blessing upon you, until there is enough ;
   11 and send you it for food and no more destroy the fruit of your
       land; so that your vine shall no more be sickly in the field,
   12 saith the Lord Almighty, and all the nations will hail you hap-
       py : for you will be a beloved land, saith the Lord Almighty.
   13      You have brought heavy accusations against me, saith the
       Lord.
           Do you say, in what instance have we spoken against thee ?
   14 You say, " Vain is he who serveth God : and what advantage is
       it, that we have kept his charges.       For though we have walk-
   15 ed as supplicants before the Lord Almighty, yet we now call
       strangers happy ; and all that do unlawful things are built up.
       Though they opposed God ; yet they are saved."
   16      Against these things they who feared the Lord spoke to one
       another ; and the Lord hearkened and heard and wrote a book
       of remembrance before him for them who fear the Lord and
       revere his name.
   17      And they shall be, saith the Lord Almighty, an acquisition
       for me, on the day which I make ; and I will make choice of
   18 them, as a man maketh choice of a son who serveth him.              And
       when you shall be converted, you shall see the difference be-
       tween a righteous man and one who is unrighteous; and be-
   IV.      tween him who serveth God and him who serveth not.             For
       behold a day is coming, heated like an oven, which shall set
       them on fire.    And all aliens and all workers of iniquity shall be
       like stubble.    The day which is coming shall blaze upon them,
       saith the Lord Almighty, and of them neither root nor branch
    2 shall be left.   But to you who fear my name the son of righte-
       ousness will arise with healing in his wings ; and you shall go
       forth and leap for joy like young bullocks loosed from yokes.
     3 And you shall trample down the wicked, for they will be like
       ashes under your feet, on the day which I make, saith the Lord
       Almighty.
     5     Now behold I will send you Elias the Thesbite before that
     6 great and awful day of the Lord cometh ; who will turn the
       heart of father to son and the heart of one man to another
                                                                           :
                IV.                          MALACHI.
          Ch.
               that I may not come and smite the land with utter destruction.
            4 Remember the law of Moses my servant, as I gave him in
               charge at Choreb statutes and rules of rectitude for all Israel.
                                  END OF THE OLD COVENANT.
                                             NOTE.
                   Zacharias IX. I.     A Burden.']     This, and the five following Chap-
               ters, though added to what Zacharias wrote, appear evidently, from
               the style and subjects, to be the work of another.            The Evangelist
               Matthew, in his quotation, (Chap. II.) ascribes them to Jeremias.          And
               it must be allowed that the contents of these chapters agree well with
               the time of Jeremias, but by no means with that of Zacharias.              And
               the same may be said with respect to the style, which corresponds
               with that of Jeremias, but not in the least with that of Zacharias.
               From the words of the Evangelist it would appear, that in his time,
               they were considered as being written by Jeremias —and it is to be
               observed that in some ancient manuscripts, there is a large vacant
               space between the end of Chap. VIII. and IX. to distinguish what
               precedes, from that which follows.
                                                                              :
                            ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
                         THEwords -printed in italics in this Translation, arc not
            added by the Translator, as in our common version; but arc thus
            designated, as being emphatical.                                        Such as have been added, arc
            included in [                  ].
                   jYamcs of Persons and Places mentioned in the Old Testa-
            ment are spelled as in the Septuagint ; and in lite position of
            chapters, and peirts of chapters, the orelcr observed in that ver-
            sion, has, in genered, been strictly adhered to : there are, how-
            ever, a very few deviations from this ride, which the sense and
            connection seemed to require; but the numbers annexed to such
            chapters and verses will point out their relative situation in the
            Greek: an instance of this hind occurs in Job, XL. and XLII.
            anel in the position anel arrangement of the chapters or discourses
            of Jeremias, from chapter XX. to XLVI.
                    The number of the chapters and verses, (so far as it was
            thought necessary to retain them) arc inserted for the sake of
            those who may wish to compare this Translation with that in
            common use.
                  The following Errata have been observed, which the reader is
              requested to correct with his pen
                                      BY
                                 PRINTED
                          WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED,
                              LONDON AND BECCLES.
                                                   5*3
                                                                         ^^^
                                                              > ?*£ ^^H
                                                                        ^rt;-";                 j^-as
                                                             *f\LfiJ?' ?-*'-££-'...•'-_..
